Archaeological Fieldwork in Estonia 2022, 157–170




Archaeological investigations in the western room of
the ‘Clergy house’ of the Teutonic Order Castle in
Viljandi
Heiki Valk
   Tartu Ülikool, ajaloo ja arheoloogia instituut, arheoloogia osakond (University of Tartu, Institute of History
   and Archaeology, Department of Archaeology), Jakobi 2, 51005 Tartu, Estonia; heiki.valk@ut.ee




INTRODUCTION
Since the late 1990s Viljandi Municipality
has organized the conservation of the castle
ruins in Viljandi (Germ. Fellin). The castle of
the Livonian branch of the Teutonic Order
(Tuulse 1942, 55–57, 139–149; Alttoa 2015),
was founded after the conquest of Sakala
province in 1223 and it fell in ruins in the
Swedish–Polish war of 1600–1625/29.
   In 2022 conservation work, accompanied
by archaeological investigations, began in a
long building in the first outer bailey, north
of the High Castle and south-east of the pre- Fig.Viljandi.
                                                      1. Location of the research area in the castle ruins of

served castle gateway (Fig. 1). This building Jn 1. Uurimisala asukoht Viljandi linnusevaremetes.
is depicted on the castle plan from 1656 as Photo / Foto: Heiki Valk
having three rooms (Fig. 2). The Polish in-
ventory from 1599 (Viljandi 1599, 158–159) notes in this area six crumbled unroofed vaulted
rooms and cellars of stone which once functioned as the dwelling of the Teutonic Order cler-
gy. The walls of ‘the Clergy house’, although locally preserved up to the height of 1–1.5 metres,
had mostly perished until the ground level – to an extent that the contours of the building as
a whole could hardly be perceived.
   The castle ruins which were still standing in the late 18th century, as depicted on the Fellin
District map in the atlas of Ludwig August von Mellin (1798), were demolished, probably,
mainly in the first quarter of the 19th century – the owner of Viljandi manor who possessed
the land sold stones for building material to the town citizens. As a result, bigger granite
stones and well-preserved bricks were reused, but smaller stones, brick fragments and mor-
tar rubble from between them formed a thick layer of debris which filled the cellars of the
castle buildings.
158                                                                                                  Heiki Valk


                                                                 The first excavations in the ‘Clergy house’
  N
                                                             were undertaken already in 1878 when large-
                                                             scale excavations took place in the castle
                                                             ruins (Kodar 1998). An anonymous short ar-
                                                             ticle in the local weekly newspaper Felliner
                                                             Anzeiger (FA 1878) tells that the long building
                                                             north of the Convent house was cleared of
                                                             debris to the extent of 28 feet (i.e. ca. 8.5 m),
                                                             measured probably from its west end, but
                                                             the work remained unfinished due to lack
                                                             of resources and need to concentrate on the
                                                             High Castle.
                                                                 In 2022 archaeological activities began in
                                                             the western room where the removal of de-
                                                             bris had begun in 2006 (Haak & Juurik 2007,
                                                             87–89). Although the southern wall had part-
                                                             ly been unearthed then for conservation pur-
Fig. 2. Plan of Viljandi High Castle and its outer baileys
   from 1656.                                                pose, most of the cellar was still filled with
Jn 2. Viljandi ordulinnuse ja eeslinnuste plaan aastast      debris. The aim of the work was to clean the
   1656.                                                     inside until a certain depth (84.00 m a.s.l.),
Map / Kaart: Military Archives of Sweden / Rootsi Sõja-
                                                             and to conserve the unearthed walls. The
   arhiiv, KrA/0406/28/014/001
                                                             formerly opened walls had been conserved
                                                             in 2006–2007 already. The cellar walls were
                                                             planned to be exposed in the height of ca. 1.5
                                                             to ca. 2.5 metres, depending on their state of
                                                             preservation. Similar work is planned to be
                                                             continued in two other rooms of the building
                                                             in 2023 and 2024.

                                                       REMOVAL OF DEBRIS AND
                                                       ARCHAEOLOGICAL MONITORING
                                                       Since the castle ruins are a state protected
                                                       monument, archaeological monitoring took
Fig. 3. Removal of debris from the western room of the place in parallel to the removal of debris. The
    ‘Clergy house’.
Jn 3. Rusueemaldus Viljandi ordulinnuse vaimulikehoone
                                                       aim was also to discover the eastern wall of
    lääneruumist.                                      the room, depicted on the plan from 1656,
Photo / Foto: Heiki Valk                               and to find out the original depth of the cel-
                                                       lar by digging two 1 × 1 m trenches.
     Debris of rather even composition, consisting of decomposed mortar, granite and brick
rubble, as well as some better preserved bricks and roof tile fragments, were removed by a
big excavator (Fig. 3). From the rubble also a fragment of hard mortar floor, covered by black
layer of soot referring to a great fire was found.
     Finds from the debris were not numerous, being represented by a few Late Medieval or
Early Modern Times pottery fragments. The most outstanding item was the basket-hilt of
weapon, decorated with engraved images (Fig. 4). According to the estimation by Ain Mäesalu
(TÜ) it might originate from a sable, according to Jaak Mäll (SALM) from a left-hand dagger – a
Investigations in the western room of the ‘Clergy house’ of the Teutonic Order Castle in Viljandi                       159


civil weapon which belonged to the same set
with a rapier. Both estimations date the find
to the second half of the 16th or first half of
the 17th century. In addition, from the debris
a decorative bone plate with engraved plant
ornamentation, probably also from the same
period (Fig. 5: 1), and some animal bones
were found.                                                                                                         0   2 cm

   The debris also contained six bricks with
animal footprints – cat and dog paw prints                  Fig. 4. A basket-hilt of a sword or left-hand dagger.
and sheep/goat hoove prints were all rep-                   Jn 4. Mõõga või vasakukäepistoda käekaitse.
resented with two items (Valk 2022) – and                   (VM 11646: 7.)
three examples of graffiti drawn on unburnt                 Photo / Foto: Riina Rammo
bricks. The most outstanding, but only
partly preserved graffiti find depicts a bug
(Fig. 6: 1), but there were also a cross-like im-
age (Fig. 6: 2) and a fragment resembling an
eye (Fig. 6: 3). Paw prints are common finds                                           1

on medieval bricks. For example, in Turaida
castle in Latvia over 150 such items have
been unearthed (Ose 2015, 119–135; figs 35,                    0   1 cm
                                                                                                       2
66). From Turaida also different graffiti imag-
es were found (ibid., fig. 10).                             Fig. 5. Finds from the debris. 1 – a decorative bone plate,
                                                                2 – a crossbow bolt.
                                                            Jn 5. Leiud rusukihist. 1 – kaunistustega luuplaat,
THE STRUCTURE INSIDE THE
                                                                2 – ammunooleots.
‘CLERGY HOUSE’                                              (VM 11646: 15, 26.)
When removing the debris from the                           Photos / Fotod: Andres Vindi, Riina Rammo
south-eastern part of the room, firstly a cor-
ner of a brick structure came to light. Later it
appeared to be preserved at the height of 11
bricks. When digging deeper, the top surfac-
es of ca. 1.2 m wide walls, directing towards
the north and the west from the discovered
corner of the structure, appeared beside it at
the level of ca. 83.90 m a.s.l. The finding of
the corner of an unknown building caused
changes in further activities. It was decided
that cleaning the surfaces of the discovered
structure will take place in the autumn. The
walls of the ‘Clergy house’ were conserved
soon after archaeological monitoring.
   When the wall surfaces were cleaned of
debris in September, remains of a quadran-
gular building of somewhat irregular shape,
                                                            Fig. 6. Graffiti images on medieval bricks from Viljandi.
not depicted on the plan from 1656, appeared                Jn 6. Grafiti Viljandi ordulinnuse keskaegsetel tellistel.
(Figs 7–8). The structure was 5.05–5.75 m                   Photos / Fotod: Riina Rammo, Heiki Valk, Mait Raudsepp
160                                                                                                         Heiki Valk




Fig. 7. The western room of the ‘Clergy house’ in Viljandi with discovered walls inside it and the re-constructed hypo­
    caust mouth in the background. View from the north-west.
Jn 7. Viljandi ordulinnuse vaimulikehoone lääneruum sellest avastatud ehitise müüride ja hüpokaustahju rekonstruee-
    ritud suuavaga tagaplaanil. Vaade loodest.
Photo / Foto: Heiki Valk


long in east–west direction and 4.3–4.65 m wide. Its western wall was less preserved, being
destroyed by some earlier excavator work, as shown by Soviet period trash in the backfilled
debris. The thickness of walls was ca. 1.2 m in the north, east and south and 1.3 m in the west,
and the inner measures of the building were 2.93 m in the north, 2.2 m in the east, 3.3 m in the
south and 1.9 m in the west. The walls were made of granite, but for the outer corners and for
lining the 1.35 m wide doorway on the west side bricks were used.
   The debris between the discovered building walls differed from rubbish removed from
above. Most of the debris consisted of unbroken granite stones with the diameter of mostly
25–40 cm, but in some cases up to 60 cm, some of them with sooty surfaces. In the south-east-
ern inner corner where the wall had preserved at a bigger height two stones on top of each
other projected from the inner side of wall lines, indicating either a perished mantel chimney
or a vault. Cracked stones in the eastern wall also refer to making a big fire in the building.
The inside of the structure was not emptied of stones because of limited resources.
Investigations in the western room of the ‘Clergy house’ of the Teutonic Order Castle in Viljandi                                    161


  N




                                                                                                             0                       3m




Fig. 8. The western room of the ‘Clergy house’ in Viljandi with discovered walls of an unknown building.
Jn 8. Viljandi ordulinnuse vaimulikehoone lääneruum ja selles avastatud ehitise müürid.
Photo / Foto: Heiki Valk. Photogrammetry-based ortophoto / Fotogrammmeetriapõhine ortofoto: Karoline Mai


    In front of the doorway a terrace made of
bricks projected 75 cm out of the wall line
(Fig. 9). It remained unclear how long the
structure in north–south direction was, since
it was opened only in the width of 1.1 metres.
When opened from the west, it appeared that
the terrace was 5 bricks (ca. 50 cm) high and
its bottom lay on intact light brown clay. A
radiocarbon date from some pieces of birch
bark from under the wall at the depth of
81.76 m a.s.l.1) gave the result 860±30 BP, cal-
ibrated age with 95.4% probability 1052–1077
(5.8%) or 1156–1263 AD (89.6%). Both the
doorway and the terrace were covered with
intensively black sooty cultural layer which
                                                                       Fig. 9. The doorway of the discovered building and ter-
contained several up to 3–4 cm thick patch-                                race in front of it.
es of ash, indicating making fire inside the                           Jn 9. Avastatud ehitise ukseava ja astang selle ees.
building, but there were no finds.                                     Photo / Foto: Heiki Valk


1 Poz-166090. All radiocarbon samples were calibrated with OxCal 4.4 programme (Bronk Ramsey 2009) and IntCal20 calibration curve.
162                                                                                   Heiki Valk


STRUCTURES IN THE WALLS OF THE WESTERN ROOM
Some formerly unknown structures appeared also in or at the walls of the western room of
the ‘Clergy house’. In the northern wall of the room seven rectangular openings with the
width and height of ca. 35–40 cm and the depth of 78–90 cm – evidently meant for the floor
beams of the ground floor – came to light (Fig. 10).
    In the southern part of the eastern wall the mouth of a medieval hypocaust was discov-
ered in a 1.2 m wide niche during the removal of debris. The arched hypocaust mouth was 40
cm wide and the inside of the stove was filled with brick and mortar rubble. Debris and soil
in front of the stove mouth, unfortunately partly disturbed by the excavator, contained some
coarseware pottery fragments characteristic of the second half of the 16th century. From the
dark soil in front of the hypocaust also some fish bones and a few mammal bones were
found. It seems that the hypocaust was last used during the Livonian War (1558–1583). To
conserve the hypocaust mouth, a protective wall imitating the original was built in front of it
soon after unearthing (Fig. 7), and the structure was covered with new bricks on the ground
level. The hypocaust remains in the next room will be unearthed during the next fieldwork
season.
    75 cm west of the south-eastern corner a 45 cm wide and 50 cm high opening framed with
blocks of travertine came to light (Fig. 11). The opening which had a rising bottom made of
carelessly laid bricks, and a rising ceiling, became wider both towards the south-east and
south-west. Both its mouth and end were filled with debris. When the opening was discov-
ered and debris had been removed from its mouth, half-decayed maple leaves, referring to
recent exposure, came to light.
    In the distance of 1.7–3.2 m from the south-eastern corner, the southern wall of the room
became lower on the inside, having a slanting surface (Figs 7, 8, 11). Judging by brick remains
and pieces of travertine on both broken sides of the lowering part of the wall, a window site
can be suggested there. Probably, the opening had been lined with bricks – those, as well as




Fig. 10. Openings for beams in the northern wall of the ‘Clergy house’.
Jn 10. Palgipesad vaimulikehoone põhjaseinas.
Photo / Foto: Heiki Valk
Investigations in the western room of the ‘Clergy house’ of the Teutonic Order Castle in Viljandi                  163




Fig. 11. An opening of unknown purpose and vault-basis like construction in the south-eastern corner of the room (after
    conservation).
Jn 11. Teadmata otstarbega ava ja võlvikanda meenutav konstruktsioon ruumi edelanurgas (pärast konserveerimist).
Photo / Foto: Heiki Valk


travertine fragments generally did not occur in the walls of the cellar and ground floor made
of granite. However, not a single brick from the original surface had preserved. Probably, a
window with a staircase-like bottom, similar to those formerly unearthed on the ground or
half-cellar floor of the High Castle, had shed light into the cellar from the courtyard of the
outer bailey here.
    West of the presumed window site a ca. 40 cm thick lining of bricks, with its surface below
the bottom of the opening, had been added to the inner side of the cellar wall made of gran-
ite (Figs 7, 8). The structure appeared at the depth of 84.34 m a.s.l. and was preserved in the
height of seven bricks, i.e. 70 cm until a basis of granite rocks appeared under it. The length
of the at least 3 m long structure remained unclear: the heaps of removed soil hindered dig-
ging further towards the west. In this brick part of the wall a rectangular opening with the
measures of 30 × 35 cm, evidently meant for a beam came to light. Judging by the height of
the preserved corner of the building discovered in the room, the other end of the beam must
have extended to and rested on its perished wall or on some basis beside it.
    In the south-eastern corner of the room also remains of a ca. 1-metre-high brick structure
which at first reminded vault basis remains (Fig. 11) was unearthed. The layer of plaster,
painted white with limewash, between it and the wall indicated secondary origin of the struc-
ture. However, since the south-western vault corner should have been located in the place of
the unearthed supposed window site – the cellar west of it was occupied by the unearthed
massive foundation with fire traces on its inner side –, the discovered structure cannot origi-
nate from a vault, but rather from a brick arch in the eastern wall. In the north-eastern corner
of the room a similar brick structure existed, but it seemed not to be a secondary addition to
the walls.
164                                                                                                   Heiki Valk


THE WESTERN TRENCH
The western trench with the original size of ca. 1 × 1 m was made at the western wall of the
‘Clergy house’. This wall beside the trench had been conserved until the depth of 2.45 m from
its preserved top in 2007.2 After discovering the terrace in front of the doorway of the inner
building, the trench was extended towards the east until the research areas combined (Figs 7,
8, 12).
    The layer of debris was 1–1.5 metres thick. It was mostly disturbed by quite recent excava-
tor work, as testified by various Soviet period and maybe later trash. Probably, the layer of
debris was disturbed when the inside of the western wall was unearthed for conservation
purposes, presumably in the first half of the 2000s.3 Just beside the western wall a layer of
charcoal and tiny brands, originating from a fire which destroyed the house was preserved
above debris which continued also under it – most of the trench areas was disturbed by the
excavator work.
    The late excavator disturbance did not reach the bottom of the debris. Under it a dark ca. 15
cm thick cultural layer with its top at the depth of around 82.00 m a.s.l. came to light, indicat-
                                                        ing a medieval floor level. From the black soil
                                                        two fragments of a Siegburg stoneware ves-
                                                        sel (Sieg3b, 1350–1525/50; as Russow 2006)
                                                        were found, one of them from the very bot-
                                                        tom of the layer. In addition, some grayware
                                                        sherds, a handful of calcined animal bones
                                                        and some fish bones were discovered by siev-
                                                        ing. A radiocarbon analysis from an uncre-
                                                        mated animal bone from the bottom of the
                                                        black cultural layer4 gave the result 310±30
                                                        BP, calibrated age with 95.4% probability
                                                        1490–1649 AD. Under the cultural layer there
                                                        was 10–15 cm of disturbed clay in the bottom
                                                        of the trench, followed by intact brown clay.
                                                            The black cultural layer was homogene-
                                                        ous everywhere between the western wall
                                                        of the ‘Clergy house’ and the terrace of the
                                                        structure within it. In both ends of the trench
                                                        the dark layer stretched directly until the
                                                        wall. The fact that it had not been cut by
                                                        the foundation ditches indicates that it is
                                                        secondary in relation to the walls. Although
                                                        both walls are older than the cultural layer
                                                        and have a similar foundation depth, the
                                                        lower part of the foundation on the west wall
Fig. 12. The western wall of the ‘Clergy house’ and the
    western trench, view from the east.
                                                        of the ‘Clergy house’ seemed to have been
Jn 12. Vaimulikehoone läänesein ja läänešurf, idast.    built in two stages. The very smooth inner
Photo / Foto: Heiki Valk                                surfaces of its two lowest stone rows packed

2 The western side of this wall was conserved in 2007 (Juurik et al. 2008, 76–77).
3 The time of this work remains unknown because there is no report about archaeological monitoring.
4 Poz-163960.
Investigations in the western room of the ‘Clergy house’ of the Teutonic Order Castle in Viljandi   165


with light hard mortar slanted strongly outwards, towards the west, which cannot be said
about the higher part of the wall where the wall was vertical and stones were bound with
weak light brown mortar. The bottom of the trench (with the bottom of the western wall foun-
dation at the depth of 81.90 m a.s.l.) was ca. 3 metres below the level of the castle gateway
cobblestone pavement behind the western wall.

THE NORTHERN TRENCH AND THE WINDOW
The second, northern trench was dug at the northern wall of the ‘Clergy house’, in a place
where the top of a brick arch indicating an opening in the wall appeared after the removal of
debris (Figs 7, 8, 13). The trench made between the outer wall of the house and the wall of the
discovered inner building measured finally 1.3 × 1.5 metres. From its upper part, filled with
light brown debris, similar to those removed by the excavator, a 14th–15th century crossbow
bolt5 (Fig. 5: 2) and some bones of domestic animals were found. At the depth of 0.6–1 m
the character of the fill changed. The ground, still consisting mainly of debris, turned dark
brown and contained bone fragments, both of domestic and wild animals, represented by
elk (7 toe bones, partly with traces of skinning), even-toed ungulates (4), cattle (10), horse
(1), sheep/cattle (8), pig (5) and fish.6 Near the inner wall in the upper part of the dark layer
13 osmund iron bars of Swedish origin7 and a
blacksmithing slag cake were found. The soil
contained also tiny particles of forge scale
formed during the process of blacksmithing.8
    Under the dark layer a new, ca. 40 cm
thick stratum of demolition debris with no
finds appeared. Probably, the debris orig-
inates from the period of the Livonian War.
The lower debris was followed by a ca. 5 cm
thick cultural layer which contained bones of
domestic animals, birds and fish and was fol-
lowed by a new, ca. 10–15 cm layer of debris.
A radiocarbon analysis from a bone9 gave the
result 390±30 BP, calibrated age with 95.4%
probability 1442–1524 (67.1%) or 1571–1631AD
(28.4%).
    In the bottom of the trench there was a
3–4 cm thick uneven cultural layer which
consisted of patches of petrified mortar and
hard-tramped soil. Both on the northern
and southern side of the trench there were
‘mortar noses’ which merged with that lay-
er. Evidently, the original floor of the cellar
                                                    Fig. 13. The northern trench, view from the south.
had been on the level of the ‘mortar noses’, Jn 13. Põhjašurf, vaade lõunast.
on the depth of 82.03–82.08 m a.s.l. Under Photo / Foto: Heiki Valk

5 Estimation by Ain Mäesalu (TÜ).
6 Estimations by Eve Rannamäe (TÜ).
7 Identified by Ragnar Saage (TÜ).
8 Identified by MA student Kristo Oks (TÜ).
9 Poz-163947.
166                                                                                                                   Heiki Valk


that original floor level disturbed soil/clay which contained smaller granite stones and some
animal bones (even-toed ungulates) continued for ca. 30 centimetres, stretching until intact
brown clay at the depth of 81.75–81.78 m a.s.l. A radiocarbon date from a bone from the floor
level10 gave the result 590±30 BP, calibrated age with 95.4% probability 1302–1369 (69.1%) or
1380–1412 AD (26.4%) AD. The fact that the bottoms of ‘mortar noses’ of both walls were on
the same level (82.28 m a.s.l.), indicates contemporaneous construction or re-construction
activities.
   The west side of the upper part of the trench was bordered by a one-stone-thick brick wall.
This secondary structure between the walls of the ‘Clergy house’ and the inner building was
evidently made to prevent debris which had formed in the Early Modern Times from falling
into the cellar. Evidently, the cellar had lost some of its original size following some large-
scale destruction of the castle.
   The brick arch which appeared after the removal of debris turned out to belong to a win-
dow or embrasure, lined on both sides and on its top with bricks. Its width was ca. 1.4 metres
on the inner and only ca. 30 cm on the outer side of the wall. The original inside height of
the opening had been ca. 1.1 metres – the innermost bricks had not preserved. The ceiling
and bottom of the structure raised towards the outer side of the wall. To save the bricks from
falling apart due to weather damages, the debris which filled the window opening was not
removed.
   The lower part of the northern wall of the ‘Clergy House’, made of granite, became ca.
30 cm thicker at the depth of ca. 82.76 m a.s.l., i.e. on the level of the bottom of the opening.
Both inner sides of the window or embrasure, made of bricks, ended on this broader part of
the foundation.
   Likewise at the southern wall of the ‘Clergy house’, also at its northern wall a thickening
part of bricks had been added to the inner side of the wall. This addition, located west of
the window or embrasure, was based on the wider part of the granite foundation. It was ca.
30 cm thick and merged with the brick lining of the window, indicating the same construc-
tion stage. The top surface of the structure was opened at the length of ca. 1.1 metres towards
the west; further work was also here hindered by heaps of removed debris. The fact that two
bricks of the added wall partly filled one of the seven joist holes in the northern wall also
refers to the secondary character of the brick structure.
   Thus, both trenches indicate a similar handwriting in masonry. They have a similar depth,
the cellar bottom corresponds in both cases to the depth of the wall bottoms, and the lowest
part of the cultural layer under the floor level consists of disturbed clay and stones.

DISCUSSION: CONSTRUCTION HISTORY OF THE UNEARTHED STRUCTURES
Excavations did not give a clear answer concerning the function of the building discovered
within the western room. It remains unclear whether the walls originate from a huge man-
tle chimney or a hypocaust for heating several floors above it. The fact that the walls of the
building were as thick as those of the ‘Clergy house’ refers to the notable height of the struc-
ture which did not exist anymore in 1656. There are no known parallels to it from the stone
buildings of medieval castles in Estonia or Latvia.11
    The newspaper article from 1878 noted above (FA 1878) describes that during the work the
walls of a vaulted Nothschmiede, i.e. ‘emergency smithy’ were unearthed and that its floor

10 Poz-164255.
11 Data on Latvia – e-letter of Ieva Ose (Institute of Latvian History of the University of Latvia) from 2.02.2023.
Investigations in the western room of the ‘Clergy house’ of the Teutonic Order Castle in Viljandi   167


was made of bricks. The floor was not unearthed during the excavations of 2022, since the
building was filled with large rocks and debris, but it was noted that at least its threshold
floor was made of bricks. Although the text from 1878 does not give any information about
the original function of the building, it states that debris was removed from most of the west-
ern room of the ‘Clergy house’, except for its eastern end. This means that most of the debris
removed by the excavator, as well as big stones between the discovered inner walls, were not
in their original location, but are backfill from the earlier excavations.
    The chronological relations between the discovered building and the outer walls of the
‘Clergy house’ also remained somewhat unclear. Although similar bottom depths and mortar
noses of the walls of the inner structure and outer walls, both in the western and northern
trench, refer to simultaneous construction of the inner and outer wall, the seven joist holes
in the northern wall of the building contradict this interpretation, indicated the secondary
character of the inner structure. At the time when the beams existed, they could not cross the
whole western room of the ‘Clergy house’, but must have been hindered by the walls of the
inner building. Although, alternatively, the floor beams may have had their other end resting
in the perished northern wall of the inner structure, they seem to be too massive for the dis-
tance of only 1.3 metres. To the secondary character of the discovered structure refer also its
somewhat irregular shape and location (Fig. 8). If constructed simultaneously with the outer
walls, a fully regular planning might be expected.
    A radiocarbon date from birch bark found under the terrace on the west side of the
Nothschmiede, however, indicates the high age of the structure – it must have been built not
later than around 1263 already. Considering the secondary character of the Nothschmiede in
relation to the northern wall with joist holes, the latter should be earlier and belong to the
earliest phase of the stone castle, i.e. to the second quarter of the 13th century already. In this
case, the southern wall of the primary building must have been demolished, and the pres-
ent-day southern wall must be secondary in relation to the northern one.
    The function of the brick thickenings on the inner side of the northern and southern walls
remains unclear but they may indicate that the room had no cellar in its initial phase there,
i.e. that the brick additions were meant to line the uneven wall foundations, originally buried
in the ground. When the cellar was dug, the inner side of the wall foundations had to get a
definite surface. In this case, most of the western room had no cellar in its early construction
stage and there was only a narrow gap for air under the floor beams with their bottom at the
depth of 83.90 m a.s.l. In the south-eastern corner of the room the floor level was, however,
deeper at the time when the hypocaust was constructed. For heating the hypocaust, it had to
be below the level of 83.60 m a.s.l. Judging by the smoothed inner surface and lack of brick
additions, a cellar probably originally existed at the west wall of the ‘Clergy house’ in the
initial stage of the building.
    In a later construction stage a cellar with the depth of ca. 2–2.2 metres was dug, probably,
under the whole western room. The ceiling of the cellar lay at the depth of ca. 84.00 m a.s.l.
or higher, the cellar bottom was 81.80/85 m a.s.l. in the western and 82.10/20 m a.s.l. in the
northern trench. It seems likely that the brick parts added to the inner sides of the northern
and southern walls (preserved highest point, respectively, 83.90 m a.s.l. in the north and
84.38 m a.s.l. in the south) may also have carried the beams of the new, post-reconstruction
floor.
168                                                              Archaeological Fieldwork in Estonia 2022, 157–170


CONCLUSIONS
Archaeological investigations in the western room of the ‘Clergy house’ of Viljandi castle
showed once more that plans from the 17th century do not always provide an adequate pic-
ture of the situation in the Middle Ages – by that time some walls may have fully perished.
The excavations showed different stages in the history of the room: in the first stage there ex-
isted cellar(s) only in limited area(s), at least in the south-eastern corner near the hypocaust
and at the western wall. Only in the later stage of the building a cellar with a huge mantle
chimney of a large hypocaust in it was dug, probably, under the whole room. Excavation re-
sults also show that the northern wall of the building belongs to the earliest stage of the stone
castle, being a part of its original circular outer wall.
   Evidently, the ‘Clergy house’ burnt and was strongly damaged in the Livonian War and
part of the cellar was filled with debris. In the remaining part, blacksmithing activities based
on imported raw iron continued in the era of the Polish rule (1582–1625) in south Estonia.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by Estonian Research Agency research grant PRG1931 Estonia in
1100–1400: native society, culture and traditions in the time of changes. The author expresses
his gratitude to Eve Rannamäe who identified the animal bones and to Villu Kadakas (TLÜ)
for valuable comments during the excavation process.

REFERENCES
Alttoa, K. 2015. Viljandi ordulinnuse arhitektuur / On      Mellin, L. A. 1798. Der Fellinsche Kreis / Le cercle de
   the Architecture of Viljandi Castle. – Viljandi ordu-       Fellin, Gezeichnet von L. A. Graf Mellin, gestochen
   linnus ja Lossimäed läbi aja / The Teutonic Order’s         von Carl Jättnig. Riga.
   castle and castle hills in Viljandi through time.        Ose, I. 2015. Turaidas pils 13.–17. gadsimta būvkera-
   Comp. and ed. by A.-A. Vislapuu. Viljandi Muuseumi          mika. / Building ceramics of Turaida castle in the
   Toimetised, V. Viljandi, 87−109.                            13th–17th centuries. Turaida.
Bronk Ramsey, C. 2009. Bayesian analysis of radiocar-       Russow, E. 2006. Importkeraamika Lääne-Eesti linna-
   bon dates. – Radiocarbon, 51: 1, 337–360.                   des 13.–17. sajandil. Tallinn.
FA 1878 = Bericht über die Ausgrabungen bei der             Tuulse, A. 1942. Die Burgen in Estland und Lettland.
   Schlossruine. – Felliner Anzeiger, no. 42, 25.10.1878.      Õpetatud Eesti Seltsi Toimetused / Verhandlungen
Haak, A. & Juurik, R. 2007. Archaeological investiga-          der Gelehrten Estnischen Gesellschaft, XXXIII.
   tions in Medieval Viljandi. – AVE, 2006, 85–98.             Dorpat.
Juurik, R., Lillak, A. & Valk, H. 2008. Archaeological      Valk, H. 2022. Keskaegsed jäljed Viljandi linnuse tellis-
   investigations at the castle of the Teutonic Order in       tel: kes jooksis põletamata ehituskividel? – Tutulus,
   Viljandi. – AVE, 2007, 75–83.                               2022, 24–25.
Kodar, A. 1998. Esimesed arheoloogilised väljakaeva­        Viljandi 1599 = Viljandi ordulinnus ja linn selle juures.
   mised Viljandi linnusevaremetes 1878.–1879. aastal.         Transl. by Katrin Vabamäe, comm. by Kaur Alttoa. –
   – Viljandi Muuseumi aastaraamat 1997. Viljandi,             Viljandi Muuseumi aastaraamat 1997. Viljandi, 1998,
   20–33.                                                      146–171.

ARHEOLOOGILISED UURINGUD VILJANDI ORDULINNUSE „VAIMULIKEHOONE“
LÄÄNERUUMIS
Heiki Valk

Viljandi ordulinnuse varemete eksponeerimise ja             tatud hoone lääneruumis (jn 1–2). Eesmärgiks oli
konserveerimise programmi raames toimusid 2022.             eemaldada rusu kuni sügavuseni 84 m üle merepinna
aastal rusueemaldusega kaasnenud arheoloogilised            ning välja selgitada ruumi idaseina asukoht ja kahe
uuringud konvendihoonest põhja pool asuva, 1599.            šurfi abil keldripõranda sügavus. Esimesed kaevami-
aasta Poola revisjoni põhjal vaimulikehooneks nime-         sed toimusid siin juba 1878. aastal, mil ruum suures
Arheoloogilised uuringud Viljandi ordulinnuse „vaimulikehoone“ lääneruumis                                       169


osas rusudest tühjaks kaevati, kuid hiljem nendega           listest seinapaksendus (jn 7–8). Ruumi kirde- ja kagu-
taas täideti. 2006. aastal oli rusu vajaliku sügavuseni      nurgas tulid nähtavale võlvikanda meenutava laotise
eemaldatud ruumi lõunapoolses osast seoses selle             jäänused, kusjuures viimasel juhul (jn 11) olid kivid
ruumiosa müüride konserveerimisega.                          laotud varem krohvitud ja lubjatud seinapinnale.
     Rusu eemaldamisel (jn 3) leiti sellest 16. sajandi II       Hoone läänemüüri äärde kaevatud šurfi (jn 7, 8,
või 17. sajandi I poolest pärinev mõõga või kahekäepist­     12) põhjas paljandus võrdlemisi hiljutiste kopatöö-
oda käekaitse (jn 4), graveeringuga luuplaat (jn 5: 1)       dega suures osas segatud rusukihi all tume, u 15 cm
ning veidi loomaluid ja savinõukilde. Kaevamistel            paksune kultuurkiht, millest leiti veidi kedrakeraami-
saadi ka kuus kassi-, koera- ja lamba- või kitsejäljega      kat, kaks Siegburgi kivikeraamikakildu (1350–1525) ja
tellist ning kolm märjale savile joonistatud grafitiga       kogum põlenud loomaluukilde. Kihis olnud looma-
kivi (jn 6).                                                 luust võetud radiosüsinikuproov andis kalibreeritud
     Ruumi keskelt avastati 1656. aasta linnuseplaanil       tulemuseks 1490–1649 pKr. Ruumi lääneseina ääres
mitte kajastuva ehitise alusmüürid. Esmalt tuli nähta­       oli rusukiht valdavas osas varasemate kopatöödega
vale ehitise tellistest, „tornina“ säilinud kagunurk,        segatud ja sisaldas nõukogudeaegset prügi. Läänes,
mille all jätkusid põhja ja lääne suunas lõhutud maa-        linnusevärava juurde viival teel seisnud kopp oli
kivimüüride pealispinnad. Sügisel järgnenud uuri-            madalamaks lõhkunud ka avastatud ehitise müüre,
mistöödel puhastati välja ida–lääne sihis 5.05–5.75 m        kuid polnud sealt kaugemale ulatunud. Linnuse vii-
pikkuse ja põhja–lõuna sihis 4.3–4.65 m laiuse ehitise       mase põlemisega seonduvat, rusudel lasuvat põlen-
1,1–1,4 m paksuste müüride kontuurid ja pealispinnad         gukihti oli segamata säilinud vaid väike lõik vahetult
(jn 7–8). Müürid olid maakivist, vaid välisnurkade ja        lääneseina ääres.
läänes olnud ukseava vormistamisel oli kasutatud                 Pärast läänešurfi pikendamist kuni avastatud
telliseid. Ehitise sisemus oli täidetud rusuga, millest      astangu seinani ilmnes, et tume kultuurkiht, mis kat-
valdava osa moodustasid suured raudkivid, idasei-            tis ka ehitamisel tekkinud mördininasid, moodustab
nas oli ka põlemisjälgedega kive. Selle kagupoolses,         kahe seina vahelise kompaktse ladestuse ja on neist
teistest kõrgemalt säilinud sisenurgas paljandus kaks        hilisem. Astang ja hoone läänesein (jn 12) olid sama
ülestikku kivi, mis pärinevad võlvikannast või osu-          vundeerimissügavusega, toetudes inimtegevusest
tavad kõrgemal mantelkorstna taoliselt kitsenevale           puutumata pruunile savile. Kultuurkihi ja puutumata
ehitisele.                                                   savi vahel oli u 15 cm paksune rusu ja tellisetükke
     Lääneküljel asuva ukseava ees tuli nähtavale            sisaldava segatud savi lade.
tellistest pealispinna- ja välisseinaga astang, mis              Teine šurf tehti lääneruumi põhjaseina äärde,
ulatus ehitise lääneseinast 75 cm kaugusele (jn 9).          rusueemaldusel paljandunud silluse ja avastatud ehi-
Ligi 1,3 m pikkuselt avatud konstruktsiooni ulatus           tise põhjamüüri vahele (jn 7, 8, 13). Pealmisest rusuki-
põhja ja lõuna suunas jäi ebaselgeks. Viie tellise kõr-      hist, mis kujutas endast kopaga eemaldatud pinnase
guse esiseina alt leitud kasetohutükkidest võetud            jätku, leiti 14.–15. sajandi ammunooleots (jn 5: 2).
radio­ süsinikuproov andis kalibreeritud tulemuseks          Järgnes u 30–40 cm, lõunaseina ääres kuni 70 cm pak-
1052–1077 või 1156–1263 pKr. Osaliselt avatud ukseava        sune tume, loomaluid, sealhulgas põdraluid sisaldav
ja astangu pinda kattis 15–20 cm paksune must üht-           rusulade, mille seinaäärsest ülaosast leiti 13 Rootsi
lane nõgine leidudeta kultuurkiht, milles oli 3–4 cm         päritolu toorraua – osmundi – tükki, ääsišlakikook
paksu­seid tuhalaike.                                        ja sepatööle viitavaid tagiliblesid. Tumedale rusule
     Vaimulikehoone lääneruumi põhjaseinas paljan-           järgne­sid õhem leidudeta rusukiht ja õhuke rohkete
dus rusueemaldusel seitse põrandatala kandepesa              loomaluudega kiht, millest võetud radiosüsiniku-
(jn 10) ning seinas oleva ava tellistest silluse ülaserv.    proov andis tulemuseks 1442–1524 või 1571–1631 pKr,
Ruumi kagunurgast leiti hoone keskmisse ruumi jääva          ning veel üks rusukiht. Seejärel paljandus kunagine
hüpokaustahju suu. Et konstruktsioon ei laguneks,            keldripõrand – seinte ehitamisel või krohvimisel
ehitati selle ette originaali jäljendav uutest tellistest    maha pudenenud mördi laigud ja tume, loomaluid
kaitsev sein (jn 7). Kagunurgast meetri kaugusel pal-        sisaldav muld nende vahel. Radiosüsinikuproov andis
jandus lõunaseinas allikalubja plokkidega ääristatud,        põrandakihis olnud loomaluu vanuseks 1302–1369 või
tõusva põhja ja laega ning müüri sees lõuna poole            1380–1412 pKr. Sügavamal asus ligi 25 cm paksune
laienev avaus (u 45 × 50 cm). (jn 11). Veidi lääne pool      vähesel määral rusu sisaldav savi, mis ulatus kuni
tuli lõunaseinas nähtavale väga lagunenud ja sel-            puhta pruuni loodusliku savipinnaseni. Šurfi lääne-
ged piirjooned kaotanud arvatava keldriakna koht.            servas tuli nähtavale kahe suure müüri vahele ehi-
Viimasest läänes algas maakividest müüri külge lao-          tatud ühe kivi paksune, linnuse hiliseimast, suurtele
tud u 40 cm paksune ja vähemalt 3 meetri pikkune tel-        purustustele järgnenud kasutusjärgust pärit tellis-
170                                                                                                  Heiki Valk


sein. Viimane toetus rusukihile ja tõkestas lääne pool   võrrel­des tõstetud. Kuna hoone põhjaseinas oleva-
oleva rusu varisemist sepikojaga keldriruumi.            tel talaaukudel puuduvad lõunaseinas vasted, võib
    Šurfi kaevamisel selgus, et sillusekaar pärineb      arvata, et põhja­sein pärineb hoone varaseimast ehi-
väljapoole tõusva põhjaga akna- või laskeavast, mille    tusjärgust ning et algne lõunasein on lammutatud
kaar oli jälgitav ka müüri välisküljel. Aknaava põhja    ja hiljem hoone laiendamisel uuega asendatud. Kui
kõrgusel muutus hoone läänemüür ligi 30 cm pak-          ruumi sisemuses oleva kütmisrajatise läve ees olev
semaks (jn 13). Aknapõsed olid tellistest ja ulatusid    terrass on ehitatud selle seintega samaaegselt, peab
soklitaolise müürilaiendi servani, toetudes sellele      hoone talaaukudega põhjaseina alaosa olema vara-
maakividest alusele. Tellistest müüripaksendus jätkus    sem ja pärinema, arvestades terrassi serva alt leitud
maakividel ka aknapõsest lääne poole. Juurdelao pea-     kase­tohutüki dateeringut, juba 13. sajandi teisest
lispind paiknes ligikaudu rusueemaldustasandil ning      veerandist.
kaks tellist ulatusid ka ühte põhjamüüris olevatest          Vaimulikehoone on saanud väga tugevasti kanna-
tala­pesadest, viidates laiendi sekundaarsusele algse,   tada ja põlenud Liivimaa sõja ajal (1558–1583). Nüüd
talaaukudega müüri suhtes.                               on osa keldrist täitunud rusudega ning ruumidest on
    Kaevamistulemused näitavad, et vaimulikehoone        kasutusele jäänud vaid osad. Põhjašurfi kaevamis­
lääneruumil on mitu ehitusjärku. Algselt pole keld-      tulemuste põhjal on selle asukohas Poola ajal paikne-
rit olnud kaugeltki kogu hoone ulatuses – tõdeda         nud sepikoda. Lääneruumi keskel olev ehitis on juba
võib seda vaid kagunurgas hüpokausti ees ja oletada      1656. aastaks olnud täiesti lammutatud ning selle-
lääne­seina ääres. Hiljem on põhjaliku ümberehituse      aegsel linnuseplaanil ei kajastu. Suur osa vaimulike-
raames lääneruumi alla tehtud nähtavasti täiskel-        hoone lääneruumist kaevati esimest korda lahti juba
der ning ruumi keskele on rajatud kas massiivsete        1878. aastal ning sealt 2022. aastal eemaldatud pinnas
seintega väga suure hüpokaustahju kütteruum või          kujutab endast toonast tagasitäidet.
mantel­ korsten. Keldri lage on nüüd varasemaga
