Archaeological Fieldwork in Estonia 2016, 181–194




Results of archaeological surveillance in Tallinn
during the reconstruction of Viru, Vana turu and
Kuninga Streets in 2015–2016
New data about the fortifications of the Viru Gate
Ants Kraut
   Muinasprojekt OÜ, Pikk 46, 10133 Tallinn, Estonia; ants.kraut@eesti.ee


Ragnar Nurk
   Tallinna Linnaplaneerimise Amet, muinsuskaitse osakond (Tallinn City Government, Urban Planning
   Department, Division of Heritage Protection), Raekoja plats 12, 10146 Tallinn, Estonia




INTRODUCTION
From October 2015 to August 2016 Muinasprojekt OÜ carried out archaeological surveillance
work in the heritage protection area of Old Tallinn in connection with reconstruction of wa-
ter and sewage piping, electricity cables and also renewing the pavement of sideways and
driveways to the same street level (Fig. 1). Surveillance work was carried out on the streets
Viru, Vana turu and Kuninga. The work was conditioned by the intention of the Tallinn City
Government to convert the area around Viru, Vana turu and Kuninga Streets into a pedes-
trian zone. The contours of the destroyed Viru Gates and other historic buildings were to be
marked on the street pavement. The project was a continuation of earlier reconstruction of
Harju Street into a pedestrian street (for the archaeological part of the work, see Russow et
al. 2014, 16–17), all the mentioned streets were to form an uniform area where people can
appreciate the history of the town and feel the former urban space by perceiving the marking
of the historic town buildings.
    Archaeological fieldwork concentrated on the documentation of the streets during on-
going earthworks – bringing the sidewalks and driveways to the same level and installing
underground technical networks. Depending on the nature of the reconstruction work and
current on-site requirements, archaeological studies were planned as watching briefs or ex-
cavations. The results presented in the current article do not aim to provide full scientific
analysis of the area, but rather offer initial knowledge about the recent fieldwork. Earlier
building archaeological and archaeological approaches of the area provided very useful in-
formation and support throughout archaeological fieldwork (Zobel 1980; 2014; Russow et
al. 2017). The finds unearthed are stored in the archaeological research collection of Tallinn
University (AI 7477). The general overview and description of the investigations is written by
Ants Kraut, the analysis of the found structures presented by Ragnar Nurk.
182                                                                                                                               Ants Kraut and Ragnar Nurk


                                                                                                 N                                                    N


                                     St


                                                      Müü riva he St
                                   Ven
                                       e

                                                                                Aia St
                                                                                                                         G3

                                    Viru St


                 g a St
          Ku n in
                                                                                    0                100 m



                                                                                  u St

                                                                                Va na-Vir
                      4
                                                                       WM
      5

                          G1
                                                                                                                  11
                                                      8                     9
                                                                                                                                           13
              3
                                                  7                                         G2
                                                                                                                                                GR
  1                                                                                                          10        Vir u St

                                                                                                                                                15
                                              6                                                          12            GZ            14
                               2
      he St

   Müü riva


                                                                                                                                      0              10 m



              whole area of investigation / kogu uuringute ala
              stone constructions known earlier / varem teada olnud kivikonstruktsioonid
              newly discovered stone constructions / avastatud kivikonstruktsioonid
              wooden constructions / puitkonstruktsioonid
              stone pavements / kivisillutised
              reconstruction of fortifications / kindlustuste rekonstruktsioon
              moats / vallikraavid


Fig. 1. Plan of the research area at Viru Street. Numbers 1–15 indicate the location of excavated sections.
Jn 1. Viru tn uuringuala plaan. Numbritega 1–15 on tähistatud uuritud lõikude asukohad.
Drawing / Joonis: Ragnar Nurk


METHODOLOGY AND WORK PROCESS
The special conditions set by heritage conservation requirements to reconstruction work
(Pantelejev 2014) concentrated mainly on the level of the sidewalks and driveways, with the
suggestion to mark the contours of historic buildings and on preserving other aspects of the
historic appearance of the town on the present day pavement. From the standpoint of ar-
chaeology, surveillance was required, and in case preserved layers should appear, research
was to be conducted. Special attention was to be paid on medieval and also modern period
constructions (sewerage, wooden pipes for fresh water etc.), which were to be documented
and preserved. Archaeological studies followed on-going reconstruction work, archaeologist
conducted surveillance, photographed and documented the open layers. In case traces of
past structures or archaeological finds were spotted, construction work was stopped as nec-
essary for the duration of one day to a week. Supplementary technical workforce and ex-
perts were engaged as required. Trenches, apart from archaeological digs, were dug with the
help of heavy earth-moving machinery and powerful earth absorbing equipment. Decisions
Archaeological surveillance of Viru, Vana turu and Kuninga Streets in 2015–2016                     183


about unavoidable demolitions were made
in consultation with heritage specialists of
the Tallinn City Government. A considerable
part of the research was conducted in quite
extreme weather conditions, including win-
ter period.
    The present paper introduces the main
results of the fieldwork, moving in the Old
Town from inside to outside: from the cross-
ing of Kuninga, Kullassepa and Harju Streets
to the Viru Street ending at Viru Square /
Pärnu Road. Since drawings are still in draft
format and artefacts collected are not yet
properly analysed, the following is a prelim-
inary overview which can be specified after
the completion of the report. Several meas-
urements are approximate. The logistics of
the reconstruction work (different pipelines
at different heights, securing access for pe-
destrians and servicing personnel etc.) re-
quired that some sections were excavated
several times or parts of the same construc- Fig. 2. Viru Gate: the main gate and barbican in the
                                                      mid-15th century as suggested by Rein Zobel (2014,
tions were seen one fragment after another            fig. 303).
and not together. The studied sections, ob- Jn. 2. Viru pea- ja eesvärav 15. sajandi keskpaiku Rein
jects and finds are designated with numbers           Zobeli (2014, jn 303) nägemuse järgi.
on the plan (Fig. 1: 1–15).
    In order to assist the reader to better understand the following overview, the authors
feel it necessary to explain first the chronology of the studied fortifications as their main
researcher Rein Zobel has formulated it (Zobel 1980; 2014; see also Fig. 2). The original Viru
Gate, referred to as the main gate (Fig. 1: G1), in line with the town wall, and a water mill in
front of it (Fig. 1: WM) were built in the mid-14th century. By the last quarter of the 14th cen-
tury they were supplemented with the first barbican with side defence walls to connect the
gates. Archaeological fieldwork did not trace remains of this barbican. The present barbican
(Fig. 1: G2) was built in the mid-15th century, and the main gate saw a few additions to its
construction. In the 1470s the presumed earlier outer defence wall was replaced by the so-
called Great Zwinger (Fig. 1: GZ), which had a new gate at its northernmost end (Fig. 1: G3).
The main gate was reconstructed into a five storied gate tower in the first years of the 16th
century. In 1558 the zwinger was rebuilt into earthen fortification – the Great Roundel of
the Viru Gate (Fig. 1: GR) –, which in turn was reinforced towards the end of the century.
In the mid-17th century the roundel was rebuilt into the High Bastion of the Viru Gate, the
barbican was closed and the passage was moved to Vana-Viru Street through a new gate in
the rampart. In the second half of the 17th century a moat was built in front of the bastions,
supported with earthen fortifications and associated walls, which in turn were replenished
in the 18th century. Viru main gate was demolished in 1843 and passage through the barbi-
can was restored in the year 1888, removing parts of earthen fortification located in front of
it (Zobel 1993, 30–31).
184                                                                        Ants Kraut and Ragnar Nurk


RESEARCH RESULTS
Inside the fortified town
Excavations on the Kuninga Street and Vana turg (Old Market) provided somewhat less infor-
mation than in the area of fortifications but still some noteworthy discoveries were made. In
the westernmost part of the research area small spots of intense black humus – however, with-
out any remarkable finds – were documented. One of such places was in front of Kuninga St. 3,
where ca. 1 m from the present street level an approximately 20–30 cm thick layer was found, on
it some limestone slabs hinted possibly to some kind of construction, for example, a probable
floor level or pavement (Fig. 3). In the southern part of the Vana turg, in front of Kuninga St. 1,
2 m from the present street level, a similar layer existed. In both of these spots the layer com-
posed of natural sand that had been turned considerably darker due to the occupation layer
which had covered it, but unfortunately was not preserved. It is remarkable that in between
these two locations earlier remains of a fireplace have been found and documented, dated to
prehistoric period, i.e. not later than the beginning of the 13th century (Talvar 2000).
    On the north side of Kuninga Street, in front of Kullassepa 13 / Kuninga 8, the basement
walls of the building and its protruding parts – the foundations of former kiosks – became
visible. On the south side of the street the basement of the former building that had been
hit in World War II and demolished in the 1950s was documented, presently located at
Harju St. 1. The uncovered walls enabled to determine the exact location of the building and
to finalise the marking of the location of historic buildings on the pavement, which had been
started two years ago in the area of the Harju Street. The area of the Vana turg itself has been
previously used for installation of various pipes and cables very intensively, mostly with-
out archaeological investigations, although some research has taken place here in the 1970s
(Deemant 1979). The present project concentrated mainly on refurbishing the pavement, to-
gether with the upper fill and rubbish layers immediately beneath it. New water pipes were
installed mostly inside existing tubes with relatively modest digging work. No traces of occu-
pation layer of archaeological value were discovered.
    Along the Viru Street almost in its full length a power cable trench ran at the southern
side of the street and water pipe trench at its northern side. The power cable trench reached
1 (occasionally 2) m and the water pipe 2 m in depth from the present street level. Power
cables were installed in exactly the same location as earlier cables, water pipes immediately
next to the old ones. That means historical constructions were already earlier more or less
demolished. The occupation layer of archaeological interest, including structures, was better
preserved in profiles and at the bottom of the trenches.
    In the western part of Viru Street, between the streets Vana turg and Müürivahe, a variety
of structures were studied despite of the numerous technical installations like 19th century
limestone collectors (pipelines), 20th century concrete communication cable tunnels and a
maze of gas and water pipes. This section enabled archaeologists to observe the connections
of limestone pipelines to individual houses and to document the details of basement walls
on the northern side of the street east of Vene Street. Only very sporadic traces of earlier
settlement activities could be noted in the form of a black humus rich layer – however its
dating remained unclear. On the southern side of the street, where cables were installed, on
the level of the basements of existing buildings, only scarce traces of some earlier structures
became visible, like remains of terrace-staircases etc.
    Closer to Müürivahe Street, valuable data concerning the town’s historical water sup-
ply system was obtained. The trench for a new water line revealed longer sections of water
Archaeological surveillance of Viru, Vana turu and Kuninga Streets in 2015–2016                                                                  185


pipe, made of timber beams and covered
with planks that ran along Viru Street. Along
Müürivahe Street 2.2 m from the street level a
timber pipe with the diameter of 20 cm ran,
also consisting of bottom and upper part,
here wrapped into birch bark. The pipe was
stratigraphically earlier than the wall also
running along the street (referred to in more
detail below). Another pipeline that was
gouged out from round beams whose junc-
tions were connected with iron collars was
seen in the northern part of the street, west
from Viru St. 11, running in the south-east
direction. Probably part of the same pipe-
line was documented at the corner of Viru
and Müürivahe Streets, next to the building
at Müürivahe St. 38, at the inner side of the
town wall (see below). This pipe reached
to a timber water container measuring 1.8
                                                Fig. 3. Darkened natural sand layer in front of
m in diameter and preserved up to 1.1 m in         Kuninga St. 3.
height (Fig. 1: 1). The durable container made Jn 3. Tumenenud looduslik liiv Kuninga tn 3 ees.
of 10 cm thick upright balks and bottom of Photo / Foto: Ragnar Nurk
the same material was lined from the outside
with a 10–15 cm thick clay layer (clay insulation existed also around pipes). A timber water
pipe with the diameter of 20 cm was connected to the container in its north-west corner.
The southern part of the barrel remained in its original position. Apparently the barrel had
been connected to the local water system via the pipe under the adjacent building. It was not
possible to precisely date the elements of water system, yet so far pipes drilled from whole
logs discovered in Tallinn have been dated to the Modern Period (e.g. from the 18th century
onwards¹), although it cannot be excluded that the locations of pipes and wells may consist-
ently originate from the Middle Ages.

Medieval Viru main gate and barbican
The area from the site of the Viru main gate up to the partly preserved barbican also provided
an opportunity to study cable trenches dug in the southern side of the street and trenches
dug for water pipelines in the central and northern side of the street. The overview of results
starts from chronologically earlier parts of medieval fortifications, i.e. from inside to outside.
   Remarkable results were obtained from the excavation at the crossing of the Viru and
Müürivahe Streets. On the southern side of Viru Street, at the north-western corner of the
building at Viru St. 24 / Müürivahe St. 38 a well preserved section of the town wall was exca-
vated (Figs 1: 2; 4), which was erected 2 m below the present ground level (absolute altitude
ca. 4.6 m). The inner side of the wall had earlier been damaged. The thickness of the preserved
part was 2.5 m. On the inner side, under the town wall a small fragment of an earlier building

¹ Archaeological evidence from Mündi St. 4 (1999), Town Hall Square (1971), among a few other places. Pers. comm. Erki Russow. In 2015 also from
Sauna St. 8 where 17th century stove tile fragments were collected from the trench backfill of one such pipe (pers. comm. Guido Toos, Agu EMS
OÜ), but it is possible that the tiled stove built in the 17th century might have been demolished later in the 18th century (Russow et al. 2010, 252).
186                                                                             Ants Kraut and Ragnar Nurk


                                                            had been preserved under its foundation.
                                                            This small section crossing the town wall had
                                                            been built with extremely strong lime mortar.
                                                            Its location in the immediate vicinity of the
                                                            gate tower is very intriguing. Archaeological
                                                            excavation established that the part of the
                                                            town wall adjacent to the main gate was of
                                                            later origin. This may well support Zobel’s
                                                            analysis of the historic measurements of the
                                                            tower, according to which it was at the end of
                                                            the Middle Ages enlarged southwards (Zobel
Fig. 4. Outer side of the town wall south of the main gate.
                                                            2014, figs 75 & 76) – expectedly also the part
Jn 4. Linnamüüri vundamendi väliskülg peaväravast           of the town wall was demolished and rebuilt.
    lõuna pool.                                             The conflux with the main gate tower was
Photo / Foto: Ants Kraut                                    most probably destroyed during the installa-
                                                            tion of a collector in 1978 monitored by Jaan
Tamm (1978). On the outer side of the excavated foundation against the town wall, a massive
layer of clay was deposited, at least a meter in thickness. This may have been the insulation of
the mill pond that was part of the gate complex. According to Zobel’s calculations (Zobel 2014,
100–101), the water level in the pond must have been higher than the surrounding ground lev-
el in order for the mill to function – so an adequate insulation was of great importance. Binder
in the town wall foundation was also clay which is rather unusual in Tallinn (normally lime
mortar). Still, the inner part of the foundation had partly collapsed (had been washed away).
Here, unlike some parts of the town wall between the Viru and Karja gates (Russow et al. 2017,
51–80), a timber raft had not been built below the wall.
     In the immediate vicinity of the inner side of the town wall a floor-like section of timber
planks was revealed (Fig. 1: 3), only a bit higher than the level on which the town wall was
erected. Its purpose and dating remained uncertain, but its location would have been perfect
for a cellar or some kind of underground technical installation conveniently between the
main gate tower and the town wall – belonging possibly to the modern period, from where
most of such satellite constructions date.
     Archaeological excavation provided important information that specified the precise lo-
cation and state of preservation of the foundations of the Viru main gate (Fig. 1: 4). The
foundations of its outer (eastern) wall have been fragmentarily documented already in 1958
and 1978 (Zobel 1960; Tamm 1978). At the outer side of the gate and in its northern, but also
southern part foundation fragments of the gate were documented, which generally support-
ed the information obtained from historical plans. An important contribution was the precise
documentation of the location of the south-western corner of the foundation, which provided
supplementary information about the location of the construction (Fig. 5) and basis for mark-
ing it on the present day pavement. The outer measurements of the tower were specified to
be 11.8 × 8.8 m at the foundation level (Zobel reached to measurements 11.1 × 9.1 m for the first
floor based on the analysis of historical drawings; Zobel 1993, 30). The thickness of the foun-
dation of the outer wall of the tower was measured to be 2.5 m, it was erected more than 2 m
below the present ground (absolute altitude ca. 4.3 m). According to historical plans the spot
where it was documented could have been at the location of the gateway. If that is the case
the outer wall of the tower had continuous foundation also under the gateway. On both sides
Archaeological surveillance of Viru, Vana turu and Kuninga Streets in 2015–2016                        187


of the foundation there was the fill of clayey
soil. In the presumable location of the inner
side of the tower the number of modern pipes
was so great that nothing except the above
mentioned fragment of the south-western
corner was preserved. Although the tower
foundations had largely been demolished,
the survived elements confirm that the gate-
way must have been located not symmetri-
cally, but slightly northwards, as also indi-
cated on historical measurement drawings.
At the location of the gateway of the main
gate tower a very small fragment of cobble-
stone pavement was documented ca. 1 m Fig. 5. The south-western corner of the main gate tower
                                                     foundation.
below the present ground. Since it was laid
                                                 Jn 5. Peaväravatorni vundamendi edelanurk.
directly on the clayey soil which filled the in- Photo / Foto: Ragnar Nurk
side of the tower it could indicate the street
level after its completion, expectedly in the
mid-14th century.
    Already out of the contours of the tower,
inside the town, ca. 2 m from the inner side
of the gate tower, a limestone wall was dis-
covered that ran along Müürivahe Street
(Figs 1: 5; 6); the preserved width of it was
1.1 m – the eastern side of the wall wore
traces of demolition. Its exact nature needs
further studies, but it may well belong to the
fortification system, since it seems to be a bit
too massive for a side-wall of the collector or
something similar. The lowermost stones of
the wall were bind with clay.                    Fig. 6. Section of a lime stone wall and wooden water pipe
                                                     at the crossing of Viru and Müürivahe Streets.
    Most logically the barbican was later
                                                 Jn 6. Paemüüri lõik ja puidust veetoru Viru ja Müüri-
than the main gate tower. In that aspect             vahe tn ristmikul.
once again the fact which was first docu- Photo / Foto: Ants Kraut
mented already in 1978 was confirmed – that
the southern side wall of the barbican (Fig. 1: 6) was secondary to the main gate tower
(Fig. 7). Yet, the possible construction stages of the barbican have remained on hypotheti-
cal level. It had been established earlier by Zobel, based on the analysis of historical plans
that the northern wall of the barbican ran straight (which found additional proof now),
the southern wall, in contrary, had been broken outwards just before the barbican front
side building. Based on this data Zobel assumed that an even earlier barbican had existed,
which was shorter – reaching until the break point of the southern wall (Zobel 2014, fig.
257). Current excavation did not reveal any wall in the area of the supposed front side of the
earlier barbican. Unfortunately in that zone there was a very dense network of underground
communications by now and no scientific data was possible to detect. However, it was dis-
covered that there was a barely noticeable fraction of a couple of degrees and a possible
188                                                                               Ants Kraut and Ragnar Nurk


                                                           joint in the south wall of the barbican also
                                                           near the main gate tower (8 m from it), for
                                                           some reason exactly in the same line with
                                                           the western wall of the water mill located at
                                                           the opposite side of the barbican. The ques-
                                                           tion about the different building stages of
                                                           the barbican remains open.
                                                               The occupation layer in between the side
                                                           walls of the barbican contained construc-
                                                           tions both from the period when here – more
                                                           precisely in front of the town wall and the
                                                           main gate tower – a moat still existed and
                                                           from the period when it was already filled.
                                                           The moat was filled after the construction
                                                           of the watermill and barbican. A couple of
                                                           metres on the outer side of the foundation of
                                                           the main gate tower clay insulation with its
                                                           upper surface declining outside (eastwards)
                                                           was observable. In 1958 Zobel saw wooden
                                                           stakes in clay, presumably meant to avoid
                                                           washing clay away. Close to the gate tower
Fig. 7. The spot where barbican’s S-wall (to the left) was he also had a chance to document well pre-
   built towards the main gate tower.
                                                           served remains of a wooden bridge (Zobel
Jn 7. Eesvärava lõunamüüri kokkupuutekoht peavärava-
   torni välisseinaga.                                     2014, 82). Partly over the clay reached hu-
Photo / Foto: Ragnar Nurk                                  mus-containing layer which probably was
                                                           the upper part of the moat fill – the bottom
                                                           of the moat and natural soil was not reached
                                                           in the trench with the depth of 2 m. On the
                                                           surface of that presumable moat fill layer
                                                           also slightly declining outwards, a fragment
                                                           of timber pavement or possibly a plat-
                                                           form-like construction was found ca. 1.7 m
                                                           below the ground in front of the main gate.
                                                           Several planks of this structure were pre-
                                                           served side by side crosswise to the street
                                                           (abs. altitude 4.6–4.7 m), together with some
                                                           vertical stakes nearby (Figs 1: 7; 8). Somewhat
Fig. 8. Wooden pavement on the fill of medieval moat.
                                                           later the street level was raised with the new
Jn 8. Puitsillutis keskaegse vallikraavi täitekihil.       clayey fill layer, but the original height of the
Photo / Foto: Ragnar Nurk                                  deposit remained unclear because pipeline
                                                           trenches had destroyed all upper layers.
    Zobel has seen some horizontal wooden details also less than a metre from the present
ground. Although he interpreted these also as remains of the bridge, it seems more likely it
was the next layer of pavement. A possible reason for raising the street level was the con-
struction of the conduit leading from the mill pond to the watermill, the bottom parts
of its side walls came to light (Figs 1: 8; 9), the clayey fill reached against the conduit walls.
Archaeological surveillance of Viru, Vana turu and Kuninga Streets in 2015–2016                   189


Its vault or other covering construction was
not preserved, also the floor was not clearly
distinguishable – maybe it was higher, being
destroyed with the modern pipelines. The
inner width of the channel had been almost
2 m (!).
    Here an important question from histo-
riography has to be addressed. Zobel has
claimed in the case of all three gates on the
southern side of the town that watermills
existed first without barbicans, being locat-
ed alone in front of the town wall. Zobel’s
hypothesis has already previously been
questioned in the case of Karja Gate. On
that place archaeological investigation clar-
ified that the mill pond – which according to
Zobel had to reach to the front of the mill to
protect it – never actually had, and also the
watermill appeared to be built against the
barbican (Nurk 2014, 64–66). Here, at Viru
Gate, the fact that the moat was filled before
the water conduit was built also supports the Fig. 9. Measuring of the conduit of the watermill in the
                                                     barbican.
most logical version that there first the barbi- Jn 9. Vesiveski kanali mõõdistamine eesvärava alal.
can existed and then the watermill was built Photo / Foto: Ragnar Nurk
against it.
    A modern period limestone vaulted collector, running along Vana-Viru Street, was also a
noteworthy discovery (Fig. 1: 9), together with its stone well, both still in use today.
    At the site of the gateway of the barbican archaeologists sought to determine the in-
terconnections of the various pavements and constructions of the barbican’s gate building
(Fig. 1: 10), which two side-towers are still preserved. The various pavement layers were ob-
servable in the location of the gateway itself, but also several metres inside the barbican’s
walled area and in front of the gateway roughly until the zwinger wall (see below). The pres-
ent stage of research suggests that the bottommost layer from split granite stones without
any sand foundation was older than the foundation of the barbican. The next pavement was
made of small fieldstones that rested upon a sand and brushwood layer. Its chronological
relation with the barbican remained unclear. On top of this pavement two other layers ex-
isted in the gateway. The uppermost of them certainly dated from the modern period being
stratigraphically later than the already mentioned zwinger wall in front of the gate. The gen-
eral tendency was clear that earlier pavements were made of smaller and later pavements of
bigger and bigger stones. The street level after the erection of the gate house was hinted at
while digging near the northern tower of the barbican, where the foundation started to widen
1.1 m from the present ground level (at absolute altitude 5.16 m; Fig. 10). The third pavement
(5.17–5.25 m) was virtually at the same level, made of relatively big fieldstones with the diam-
eter up to 20–30 cm. Both the second pavement at ca. 4.75 m in its final form and the first at
ca. 4.50 m probably belong to the period before the barbican. Unfortunately, due to the later
disturbances stratigraphic relation with other medieval structures documented inside the
190                                                                            Ants Kraut and Ragnar Nurk


                                                            barbican including the wooden pavement re-
                                                            mains unclear.
                                                               Zobel’s reconstruction of the barbican’s
                                                            gate building, its architecture and defence
                                                            functions can be reviewed in the light of the
                                                            2016 excavations. Zobel assumed that there
                                                            was a moat in front of the gate building and
                                                            he assumed that its foundation continued
                                                            also in the location of the gateway, thus
                                                            forming the inner side of the moat (Zobel
                                                            2014, fig. 256). Fieldwork clearly disproved
Fig. 10. Wall section between the side towers of the barbi- this supposition. Earlier pavements were
   can next to the N-tower.
                                                            preserved in the location of the gateway and
Jn 10. Eesvärava külgtornide vaheline müürilõik põhja-
   torni kõrval.                                            foundations existed only at the sides of the
Photo / Foto: Ragnar Nurk                                   gateway; also outside of the barbican no sign
                                                            of the moat was found. Instead, at least two
earlier pavements documented in the gateway continued without interruption – thus the
moat could have been only very shallow (up to 50 cm in depth possibly). Immediately outside
the barbican wall remains of a wooden construction were found, but in the light of the pre-
viously mentioned circumstances it is questionable whether they could belong to the bridge.
    As mentioned above, near the barbican’s northern tower the foundations of gate building
were opened (Fig. 1: 11). According to Zobel’s interpretation of the 18th century measurement
drawings (Zobel 2014, 208) a smaller, pedestrian gate or sally port should have existed here. The
wall of the outer façade of the gate building was preserved in the height of 50 cm measured from
the widening foundation mentioned above, but no traces of the gate could be identified.
    The power cable trench ran through the passage of the neo-Gothic gate house located next
to the southern side-tower of the barbican, annexed to the tower in the last decade of the 19th
century. The foundations of that building were erected on an earlier wall (Fig. 1: 12), possibly
belonging to 18th–19th cc buildings depicted on historical town plans.

The area of early modern period fortifications
In the area between the Viru barbican and Viru Square / Pärnu Road several artillery forti-
fications have existed from the second half of the 15th century until the second half of the
19th century: Great Zwinger, Great Roundel and The High Bastion of the Viru Gate in sequence.
    The Great Zwinger is mentioned in historical records. Zobel has hypothetically identi-
fied it with the polygonal wall which is depicted on historical maps (Zobel 2014, 249–250).
However, these maps date from the 17th–19th centuries, when the mentioned wall had a
function to support the inner side of earthen fortification. Zobel has reconstructed the zwing-
er as a fortification consisting of a wall, erected on a higher bank of soil, and a moat in front
of it. In the course of the present excavation a presumable zwinger wall was documented in
two spots – in two sections with different directions.
    The full cross-section was revealed in the profile of a water pipeline trench (Figs 1: 13; 11).
The foundation trench for the zwinger wall was dug ca. 1 m inside earlier layers, 2 m from the
present ground level. On both sides of the wall it was still possible to trace the lowermost pave-
ment made of very small stone pieces which was documented inside the barbican’s gateway
(see above). There had been another pavement which was visible in the profile only as a stripe
Archaeological surveillance of Viru, Vana turu and Kuninga Streets in 2015–2016                      191


of sand because stones had been removed
for re-use when the zwinger wall was built
and the ground level was raised on the inner
side of it. No direct parallel for that pavement
existed in the gateway of the barbican. The
inner side of the wall foundation was laid
neatly, with the outer side against the soil,
slightly widening upwards – the reason of it
remains unclear. On the inner side of the wall
a stone foundation of some later annex was
found together with the gateway’s uppermost
(here the third) pavement. In a long profile
until Aia Street on the outer side of the wall
humus-rich layer obviously belonging to the
earlier period than the zwinger wall was ob-
servable. Towards Aia Street its upper surface
had clear signs of digging. Just after digging
that layer was covered with clayey soil which
upper surface was clearly slanting eastward.
It seems likely that the work described was
in connection with the construction of earth-
en fortifications – maybe in connection with
                                                 Fig. 11. Section of the wall in the E-side of the Great
rebuilding the former zwinger into the Great        Zwinger.
Roundel in 1558, at the beginning of the Jn 11. Müürilõik Suure zwingeri idaküljel.
Livonian War. No hint of possible moat in Photo / Foto: Ragnar Nurk
front of the zwinger wall was found.
    Another section of the wall of the Great
Zwinger was cleaned in the power cable
trench (Fig. 1: 14). Also here it was the un-
derground part of the structure which was
preserved and for the wall it was dug in
through the earlier occupation layer. Here
that layer was humus-rich and contained
some medieval finds, between that layer and
later rubbish, ca. 70–80 cm from the pres-
ent day surface, a horizon of thin wooden
planks existed on the outer side of the wall
                                                 Fig. 12. Section of the pavement made of planks outside
(Figs 1: 15; 12). Both sides of the foundation      the zwinger wall.
were laid with care in that section of the Jn 12. Laudsillutise lõik zwingeri müürist väljaspool.
zwinger wall. On the inner side of the struc- Photo / Foto: Ants Kraut
ture the floor of the niche or embrasure was
discovered, and a stone pavement made of relatively big stones. The latter was similar to the
uppermost pavement seen in the previously described spot. The thickness of both wall frag-
ments was almost exactly 2 m. A lot of limestone demolition debris was detected at the prob-
able site of the zwinger’s southern foundation, which led to the south tower of the barbican,
but the wall itself was not preserved.
192                                                                       Ants Kraut and Ragnar Nurk


    Approximately in line with the Aia Street scarp wall of the latest earthen fortification here,
the High Bastion of the Viru Gate was documented on several occasions. Its location cor-
responded well with the historical fortress plans from the 17th–18th centuries. The wall was
a typical modern period earthen fortification wall, with a slightly slanting outer surface to-
wards the moat. The width of the wall which came into light just below the existing street
level was 2.2 m. On the inner side of the wall counterforts were identified in three places, their
width and depth were 1.3–1.5 m. Soil filling of the moat in front of the scarp wall consisted
mostly of dark brownish humus-containing soil, which was partly covered with limestone
debris. Surprisingly no traces of contrescarp wall which supported the outer edge of the moat
were found. At the end of the street a cobblestone pavement was unearthed at the bottom of
the power trench, which, located already outside the moat, may be connected with the outer
defences of earthen fortifications.
    In conclusion on the topic of fortifications it should be said that some hypotheses of Zobel
are more likely than others. He has made a valuable contribution taking the maximum of his
sources, historical and archaeological, available until the early 1990s. However, it is possible
that some of his ideas may not find proof or disproof anymore because of large scale demo-
lition which has taken place earlier without archaeological documenting. In the light of the
current fieldwork it seems plausible that the main gate tower was enlarged towards the end
of the Middle Ages, while the peculiarities of construction of the town wall here raise new
questions concerning its constructional history in that particularly difficult area. Previously
unknown wall fragments and a possible junction in the side wall of the barbican – all in the
area surrounding the main gate tower wait further investigation and interpretation. There
has been a moat in front of the main gate tower which was filled when the barbican was
built. Also in case of this gate the barbican in its possibly unfinalized form seems to be earlier
than the watermill located next to it. At a later stage probably no moat existed in front of the
barbican’s gate house. The existence of a small gate beside the bigger one is uncertain. In
the final stage the ground level of the main gate and the barbican seems to have been only
ca. 1 m below the present street level. The earliest stone and also wooden pavements, which
were possible to reach remained approximately at the bottom level of the 2 m deep trench.

CONCLUSION
Ten months of archaeological surveillance during the reconstruction of Viru, Vana turu and
Kuninga Streets provided valuable information about the area around one of the main streets
in the Old Town of Tallinn with its medieval and later fortifications and constructions. The
contractor faced various challenges in providing daily communication and access for local
inhabitants, businesses and tourists in both summer and winter conditions, they also will-
ingly cooperated with archaeologists in securing necessary conditions for surveillance and
studies. As a result, valuable information was obtained from a 480 m long research area,
from modern fortifications to foundations of medieval buildings. Unavoidable demolition
was as discrete and minimal as possible. Earlier studies and historic plans were verified, their
existence, locations and exact positions were specified. Modern excavation technology like
powerful earth absorbing machinery assisted in making the required pits and cleaning the
surface as necessary, where often manual digging proved to be difficult or impossible. The
studied environment had largely been hopelessly destroyed by modern collectors and cable
lines, still the studies managed to provide sufficient evidence that enabled to verify, recon-
struct on plans and mark on present day street pavement the earlier layers of town history.
Archaeological Fieldwork in Estonia 2016, 181–194                                                             193


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Andres Sildre was consulted for architectural history. Expert advice was provided by Tanel
Moora, Villu Kadakas, Jaak Mäll, Erki Russow and Jüri Peets. Fieldwork was assisted by Guido
Toos and Tarvi Toome. Valuable help in both fieldwork and assessing the finds was provided
by Reet Maldre and Liina Maldre, drawings and measurements were done by and in coop-
eration with Tiina Sakermaa. The contribution of everyone involved is much appreciated by
archaeologist, construction company and people interested in the early history of Tallinn.

REFERENCES
Deemant, K. 1979. Archäologische Ausgrabungen auf        Talvar, P. 2000. Arheoloogiline järelvalve ja arheo-
  dem Tallinner Alten Markt. – TATÜ, 28, 4, 390–392.        loogilised kaevamised Kuninga tn. 1 loodeküljel.
Nurk, R. 2014. Täiendusi Tallinna Karjavärava ehitus-       Tallinn. (Manuscript in MA.)
  loole. – Vana Tallinn XXV (XXIX). Tallinn, 57–73.      Tamm, J. 1978. Viru tänavale rajatava kollektori haru-
Pantelejev, A. 2014. Tallinn, Viru tänava sõidu- ja         lõigu kaevetööde järelvalve aruanne (1978. a. suvel).
  kõnnitee ühte tasapinda viimise muinsuskaitse             Tallinn. (Manuscript in MA.)
  eritingimused. Tallinn. (Manuscript in TLPA.)          Zobel, R. 1960. Endise Viru väravatorni kohal piki
Russow, E., Kadakas, V. & Kaju, K. 2010.                    Viru tänavat kaevatud tranšee profiil. Tallinn.
  Varauusaegne kuldsõrmus Tallinnast. – Ilusad              (Manuscript in MA.)
  asjad. Tähelepanuväärseid leide Eesti arheoloogia-     Zobel, R. 1980. Tallinna keskaegsed kindlustused.
  kogudest. Comp. and ed. by Ü. Tamla. Muinasaja            Tallinn.
  Teadus, 21. Tallinn, 245–268.                          Zobel, R. 1993. Viru värav. – Tallinn. Ed. by V. Raam.
Russow, E., Haak, A. & Kadakas, U. 2014.                    Eesti Arhitektuur, 1. Tallinn, 30–31.
  Archaeological fieldwork in 2013. – AVE, 2013, 9–32.   Zobel, R. 2014. Tallinn (Reval). Fortifications in the
Russow, E., Kadakas, V. & Bernotas, R. 2017.                Middle Ages. Tallinn.
  80 aastat hiljem. Tallinna linnamüüri kaguosast
  1930. aastate arheoloogiliste uuringute valguses –
  Järelevastamine. Kaur Alttoale. Ed. by A. Randla.
  Eesti Kunstiakadeemia toimetised, 22. Tallinn,
  51–80.


ARHEOLOOGILISE JÄRELEVALVE TULEMUSI TALLINNAS VIRU TÄNAVA, VANA TURU JA
KUNINGA TÄNAVA REKONSTRUEERIMISTÖÖDEL 2015–2016
UUSI ANDMEID VIRU VÄRAVA KINDLUSTUSTEST
Ants Kraut ja Ragnar Nurk

Aastatel 2015–2016 teostati arheoloogilist järeleval-        Vana turu ja Müürivahe tn vahelisel tänavalõigu
vet Tallinnas Viru, Vana turu ja Kuninga tänavatel       rohkete tehnorajatiste kõrval ja all võis täheldada
seoses kommunikatsioonitrasside uuendamisega             varasemaid ehitusjärke. Müürivahe tänava joonel
ning kõnni- ja sõidutee ühte tasapinda viimisega.        kulgenud paemüüri olemus vajab selgitamist (jn 1: 5;
Sõltuvalt tööde iseloomust teostati arheoloogilist       6) – see jääb väljapoole Viru peaväravatorni, kuid on
jälgimist ja vajadusel väikesemahulisi kaevamisi ning    siiski sellele väga lähedal. U 2 m sügavusel tänavapin-
dokumenteerimist. Uuringu olulisemad tulemused           nast kaevati välja puitrenne ja veetorusid, samuti ver-
esitatakse artiklis lõikude kaupa Harju tänavast kuni    tikaalsetest prussidest koosnev kogumiskaev (jn 1: 1).
Pärnu maanteeni (jn 1), keskendudes esmajoones               Kõige rohkem uut infot saadi keskaegsete linna-
Viru värava ümbruskonnale, kus välitööd pakkusid         kindlustuste kohta. Viru ja Müürivahe ristmikul
olulist lisa Rein Zobeli poolt varem välja pakutud       tänava lõunaservas kaevati välja linnamüüri vunda-
rekonstruktsioonikatsele (jn 2).                         mendi 1,7 m kõrgusena ja 2,5 m paksusena säilinud
    Kaevetööd Vanal turul puudutasid peamiselt           lõik (jn 1: 2; 4). Tuvastati, et peaväravatorniga külgnev
varem läbikaevatud kihte kohatiste säilinud huumu-       osa müürist on hilisem, mis võiks kinnitada varase-
selaikudega (jn 3) ja vundamentidega Kuninga täna-       mat hüpoteesi peavärava gabariitide suurendami-
val. Tänava lõunaküljel puhastati välja ja markeeriti    sest keskaja lõpul. Linnamüüri välisküljel asunud
sõjas hävinud hoonete vundamendid.                       meetripaksune savikiht oli ilmselt veskitiigi isolat-
194                                                                                       Ants Kraut ja Ragnar Nurk


siooniks. Puitparve, nagu Viru ja Karjaväravate vahe-       tamise järel (jn 1: 11; 10). Ei leidnud kinnitust, nagu
lises linnamüürilõigus, müürile alla polnud tehtud,         oleks eesvärava ees kunagi olnud vallikraav või siis
mistõttu müüri sisemust oli osaliselt alt ära uhutud.       sai see olla maksimaalselt poole meetri sügavune.
Linnamüürist seespool tuli välja puitplankudest             Viru eesvärava kunagise väravaava piirkonnas olid
põrandalaadne lõik (jn 1: 3), mille otstarve ja datee-      eriaegsed maapinnatasandid sillutiste näol väga hästi
ring jäi ebaselgeks. Müür oli osaliselt rajatud mingi       jälgitavad (jn 1: 10). Kaks neist sillutistest kuulusid
varasema kiviehitise konstruktsioonile suunaga piki         aega enne eesvärava ehitamist, üks pärines ilmselt
Viru tänavat.                                               sellega umbes samast ajast ja neljas kuulus uusaega.
    Viru peavärava ida-, põhja- ja lõunaosas tuvastati      Varaseim sillutis meenutas prügitist, olles tehtud
väravaga seotud vundamentide lõigud, mis üldjoon-           purustatud maakivitükkidest savikale ja kivisele või
tes kinnitasid ajaloolise plaanimaterjali põhjal teatud     ka huumust sisaldavale täitele. Järgmisele, valdavalt
infot (jn 1: 4). Torni idapoolse ehk peafassaadi vunda-     väiksemapoolsetest maakividest sillutisele eelnes liiv
ment oli 2,5 m paksune. Torni vundamendi edela-             peenikestest hagudest vahekihiga. Kolmanda sillutise
nurga väljakaevamine andis täiendava ettekujutuse           suhteliselt suured maakivid olid õhukesel liivapadjal.
rajatise paiknemisest (jn 5). Torni põhiplaanilisteks       Uusaegne sillutis oli tehtud ühtlaselt suurtest maa-
gabariitideks saab lugeda 11,8 × 8,8 m. Leitud frag-        kividest paksule liivapadjale.
mendid osutavad, et väravakäik oli mitte torni keskel,          Viru eesväravast kuni Aia tänavani võis jälgida,
vaid rohkem põhjapoolses osas. Torni vundamentide           kuidas ühelt poolt olid säilinud keskaegsed savikad,
vaheline ja neid ümbritsev ala oli täidetud saviga.         kuid huumust sisaldavad pinnasekihid, teisalt olid
Väravatorni sisemuses u 1 m praegusest maapinnast           jälgitavad uusaegsete, suurtükkide perioodist päri-
allpool oli säilinud väike fragment sillutist, mis päri-    nevate kindlustuste elemendid ja nendega seotud
neb arvatavasti vahetult torni valmimisjärgsest ajast.      pinnasetööd, sh nende piiril puitsillutis (jn 1: 12; 12).
Kinnitust leidis varem tuvastatud asjaolu, et eesvä-        Kahes kohas oli võimalus uurida Viru värava Suure
rava poole suunduv lõunapoolne külgkaitsemüür on            zwingeri müüri, millest oli säilinud 2 m paksune
torni suhtes sekundaarne (jn 7). Põhjapoolne külg-          vundamendiosa (jn 1: 13, 14; 11). Müüri ehitamisel oli
müür kulgeb sirgelt, lõunapoolsel täheldati lisaks          sisse kaevatud eesvärava-aegse sillutise pealt. Tänava
seni teadaolevale murdekohale väravahoone lähedu-           lõunapoolses osas tuvastati müüri siseküljel laske-
ses veel üks raskemini märgatav vesiveski lääneseina        ava või niši põhi. Aia tänava pool oli varasemat kihti
joonel (jn 1: 6). Külgmüürid olid mõlemad 1,2–1,3 m         selgelt maha kaevatud ja toodud täiteks hulgaliselt
paksused. Zobeli oletatud varasemat eesväravat leida        savikat pinnast kaldega linnast väljapoole. See tege-
ei õnnestunud. Eesvärava alal peaväravatorni ja veski       vus võis olla seotud 16. sajandi keskpaiku zwingeri
vahelises lõigus leiti ka puitsillutise jäänuseid maa-      ümberkujundamisega Viru värava Suureks rondee-
pinnast ligi 2 m sügavusel (jn 1: 7; 8). Ilmselt ei kuulu   liks. Aia tänava joonel tuvastati 17.–18. sajandi Kõrge
need mitte sillale, vaid tegu on vallikraavi täitele loo-   Viru värava bastioni eskarpmüüri ülemine osa laiu-
dud teega, mis rajati pärast eesvärava esialgsel kujul      sega 2,2 m koos sisekülje kontraforssidega.
ehitamist. Alles selle järel, koos järgmise täitmisega,         Kümne kuu jooksul 480 meetri ulatuses tehtud
ehitati eesvärava kõrval paiknenud vesiveski peale-         arheoloogiline järelevalvetöö andis täiendavat infot
voolukanal (jn 1: 8; 9). Mainida tuleks ka piki Valli–      Viru tänava piirkonna kesk- ja uusaegsetest kindlus-
Vana-Viru tänavate suunda kulgevat hilisemat, täna-         tustest ja teistest rajatistest. Vältimatuid lammutus-
seni kasutuses olevat võlvkollektorit (jn 1: 9).            töid tehti kaalutletult ja väga piiratud mahus.
    Kaevati osaliselt lahti ja mõõdistati eesvärava ja      Kaasaegsete kollektorite, kaablitunnelite poolt oluli-
selle tornide vundamendid. Selgus, et väravahoone           selt rikutud keskkond andis siiski olulist teavet ajaloo-
vundamendiosa algab u 1,1 m sügavusel maapinnast,           liste kihistuste uurimiseks ja nende tänavasillutisel
mis ilmselt osutab maapinnatasandile eesvärava ehi-         markeerimiseks.
