Archaeological Fieldwork in Estonia 2015, 139–158




Medieval ship finds from Kadriorg, Tallinn
Maili Roio
   Muinsuskaitseamet (National Heritage Board), Pikk 2, 10123 Tallinn, Estonia; maili.roio@muinas.ee


Lembi Lõugas
   Tallinna Ülikool, arheoloogia teaduskogu (Archaeological Research Collection of Tallinn University),
   Rüütli 10, 10130 Tallinn, Estonia


Alar Läänelaid
   Tartu Ülikool, ökoloogia ja maateaduste instituut (University of Tartu, Institute of Ecology and Earth
   Sciences), Vanemuise 46, 51014 Tartu, Estonia


Liina Maldre
   liina.maldre@ai.ee


Erki Russow
   Tallinna Ülikool, humanitaarteaduste instituut, ajaloo, arheoloogia ja kunstiajaloo keskus (Tallinn University,
   School of Humanities, Institute of History, Archaeology and Art History), Uus-Sadama 5, 10120 Tallinn, Estonia


Ülle Sillasoo
   sillasoo.ulle@gmail.com




INTRODUCTION
In the morning of 22 May 2015, Agu Zilensk –
project manager of construction company AS
Nordecon, contacted the National Heritage
Board and informed them about remains
of a wooden ship that had been found at
Pikksilma 2/1 in Kadriorg, Tallinn. The con-
struction work had been stopped.
   The workers of AS Nordecon had come
across an obstacle while installing the
steel profile of a sheet pile wall. They start-
ed to identify the obstacle by an excavator
(Fig. 1). A total of approximately 20 frames
and planks were lifted from the watery soil
                                                           Fig. 1. View of the site of wreck Peeter on the day of discovery.
and transported to the Estonian Maritime                   Jn 1. Vaade Peetri vraki leiukohale leidmise päeval.
Museum on 25 May. In the same evening,                     Photo / Foto: Maili Roio
140                           Maili Roio, Lembi Lõugas, Alar Läänelaid, Liina Maldre, Erki Russow and Ülle Sillasoo



                 0 100 m                                      another shipwreck was found from the same
                                                              construction site at Tuukri 23. This ship-
                                                              wreck was located about 50 metres east from
                                                              the first wreck (Fig. 2).
                                                                  The National Heritage Board was on the
                                                              position that archaeological excavations
                                                              must be conducted at the findspot of the
                                                              historical wrecks, the wrecks must be sup-
                                                              ported by wooden constructions, and relo-
                                                   0   10 m   cated to a preservation area in the sea, due
                                                              to lack of proper space for storing the wreck.
                                                              Archaeological excavations were conducted
Fig. 2. Location plan of the wrecks in Kadriorg.
Jn 2. Kadrioru vrakkide asendiplaan.                          at the site by the National Heritage Board be-
Map / Kaart: Estonian Land Board / Maa-amet,                  tween 11 June and 9 August 2015.
   Maili Roio                                                     For the moment, only a fraction of the col-
                                                              lected items (pottery, stone, to a lesser extent
                                                              also metal, fish and animal bones, etc.) from
                                                              the wreck is available to study as most of the
                                                              artefacts are presently undergoing the con-
                                                              servation processes – textile and leather at
                                                              the University of Tartu, wood and metal at the
                                                              conservation laboratory of Archaeological
                                                              Research Collection of Tallinn University.
                                                              Thus the exact amount of the objects as well
                                                              as the detailed characteristics of the collec-
                                                              tion will be presented hopefully more thor-
Fig. 3. The excavation pit of wreck Viljo after the well-     oughly within the next few years. Therefore,
   point dewatering system had been installed.
Jn 3. Viljo vraki kaevand peale nõelfiltersüsteemi
                                                              at the present stage of the research, we can
   paigaldamist.                                              introduce only some preliminary estimations
Photo / Foto: Maili Roio                                      on the wreck sites and the find complex.

FINDSPOT
100 years ago, there was still water at the site of the wrecks (Fig. 2). In the 1930s there were
plans to establish a showground by the seaside in Kadriorg, and according to the agreement
between the Tallinn City Administration and the Põhja Paberi- ja Puupapivabrik (Eng. North
Factory of Paper and Wooden Cardboard), the latter began to carry coal ash from the factory
to the site, in order to fill the area. Today, the ash, construction waste and household waste
form a four-metre thick filling layer under which the historical wrecks were revealed.

METHODS
Before the archaeological surveys, the ground was peeled to the level of the wrecks and af-
ter that research with ground-penetrating radar was carried out to determine the measure-
ments of the wrecks. Since the first details of the wrecks were revealed a little less than a
metre below the sea level, a wellpoint dewatering system was placed around the excavation
area (Fig. 3). The sheet piling wall surrounding the whole construction area also helped to
Medieval ship finds from Kadriorg, Tallinn                                                               141


keep the pits dry. First the inside of the wrecks was cleaned and after that, a trench was dug
around the wrecks with an excavator. A steel support frame was placed inside the trench.
After that, the soil was removed from around and under the wrecks with shovels, and at the
same time a wooden support structure was built around the wrecks.

WRECK VILJO
Archaeological excavations were started on
the wreck that was found later. This wreck
was named ‘Viljo’ after the AS Nordecon site
manager Viljo Niit. The ship had run aground
facing Kadriorg and most of the port side and
the bottom of the ship had preserved. The
measurements of the well-preserved part
are ca. 14 × 3.5 metres. The keel has also pre-
served, but it has come loose from the bot-
tom and was located at the starboard side
next to bottom planks (Fig. 4).                   Fig. 4. The view of wreck Viljo from the stern, after the
   The remains of the wreck represent typi-          supporting structures had been installed.
cal Nordic shipbuilding traditions, in which      Jn 4. Vaade Viljo vrakile ahtri poolt pärast toestustöid.
clinker planking has been deployed. Animal        Photo / Foto: Maili Roio
hair has been used to ensure the ship’s water-
proofness. The find material of the wreck was
very poor. Most of the finds were discovered
from a mixed layer and are clearly connect-
ed to later activities on the site. Everything
valuable was most probably removed from
the ship shortly after it wrecked. The follow-
ing items can most likely be linked with the
wreck of the sailing ship: a wooden block
stuck between the frames (Fig. 5), ropes made
of hemp (Cannabis sativa), a metal tripod pot     Fig. 5. A wooden block between the frames from wreck Viljo.
found under the bottom at the aft, and most       Jn 5. Viljo vraki puidust plokk kaarte vahel.
probably also a wooden barrel lid found un-       Photo / Foto: Maili Roio
der the keel.
   After finishing the excavations and tak-
ing dendrochronological samples, the wreck
along with the details of the stempost and
sternpost were sunk in a deeper sea area
between Naissaar and Littegrund in Tallinn
Bay (Fig. 6).
   Dendrochronological samples for dating
the wreck were taken from the wreck planks
and floor-timbers, trying to find wood with
maximal number of tree rings and with min-
                                                  Fig. 6. Sinking wreck Viljo into Tallinn Bay.
imal number of lost rings from the outer          Jn 6. Viljo vraki uputamine Tallinna lahte.
end of the tree trunk. The ship was made of       Photo / Foto: Maili Roio
142                           Maili Roio, Lembi Lõugas, Alar Läänelaid, Liina Maldre, Erki Russow and Ülle Sillasoo


softwood. Altogether 20 wood samples were taken from ship planks and frames. 16 cross
sections of wood were determined microscopically as pine wood. Eight tree-ring series of the
pine samples were averaged to a 215 years long mean series 2epvil04. The oak samples were
not datable due to their small number of rings. The mean series was synchronized with dated
pine chronologies of Estonia and the rest of Europe.
    The mean tree ring series of wreck Viljo appeared to be notably similar with Estonian pine
chronology 3epestcr (AD 1111–2006, Läänelaid & Eckstein 2003; Läänelaid 2012) at the posi-
tion, where the last ring of the wreck series corresponds to AD 1487 (overlap 215 years, t = 5.63,
Gleichläufigkeit 61.7 at 99.9 significance level). The mean wreck series was even more similar
with a pine series from a Cistercian convent building in Tallinn, 3epgag01 (overlap 152 years,
t = 6.07, Gleichläufigkeit 66.9 at 99.9 significance level). From that date also the 8 single tree-ring
series were dated (Fig. 7). Unfortunately, all of the dated boards have outermost rings planed
off. Although, judging from the narrow rings near the edge of the boards, the waney edge (wood
surface under the bark) was not far from the board edge. Nevertheless, as we do not possess the
waney edge, the dendrochronological date AD 1487 has to be treated as terminus post quem –
the date after which the trees were felled. The pines were felled probably soon after 1487.
    We may assume that the pines for that ship were grown in the region of Estonia. Even if
the ship timber was Estonian-grown, it does not tell us about the location of the shipyard.
Extensive oak wood trade took place from the Baltic region to Western Europe (see Wazny
2002; Daly 2007). Also the Baltic pine wood could be shipped to any port and shipyard.




Fig. 7. Span of dated wood samples of wreck Viljo. Horizontal axis – calendar years, vertical axis – samples with their
    codes, ending with sample number. Numbers at the ends of the bars indicate the initial and last calendar year of
    the samples.
Jn 7. Viljo vraki dateeritud puiduproovide aastarõngaridade ajaline ulatus. Proovidel nende koodid, vasakul iga proovi
    varaseima ja paremal hiliseima aastarõnga aasta. Rõhtteljel kalendriaastad, püstteljel proovid.
Figure / Joonis: Alar Läänelaid
Medieval ship finds from Kadriorg, Tallinn                                                   143


WRECK PEETER
The wreck that was found first and excavated second was located at the west part of the prop-
erty. The so-called ‘Wreck Peeter’ was named after the excavator operator Peeter Hallikas.
The maximum dimensions of the wreck were 18.08 metres in length, 6.64 metres in width,
the maximum height at port side 3.05 metres and 2.11 metres at the starboard. The aft of the
wreck was pointing towards the Old Town.
    This was a medieval merchant ship, the wreck of a cog. The plank keel had preserved in
its entire length, also the ship’s bottom part built in carvel planking, sides built in clinker
planking, keelson, inner planking, large knee and crossbeams, had preserved of the ship
with a straight stem post and stern post (Fig. 8). In addition, the overlapped side planks were
clenched with double-bent nails and the frames were treenailed. The bottom and side seams
were caulked with moss retained by oak laths, in turn secured by sintels (see characteristics of
cog-like vessels in Ellmers 1994; Adams 2013).
    The assemblages of mosses used for caulking were rather homogenous, consisting of
mainly two very similar Hook-moss species (Drepanocladus aduncus and Warnstorfia flui-
tans). Homogenous bundles of moss formed of sickle were used as caulking material for
wreck Peeter. Hook-mosses are a relatively cosmopolitan pleurocarpous species with long
rambling shoots. They are aquatic mosses which grow in wetlands, including fens, pools of
stagnant water, lakeshores and riverbanks, forming green cushions in shallow water. The
floating Hook-moss (W. fluitans) grows in more oligotrophic wetland habitats.




Fig. 8. View of wreck Peeter.
Jn 8. Vaade Peetri vrakile.
Photo / Foto: Maili Roio
144                         Maili Roio, Lembi Lõugas, Alar Läänelaid, Liina Maldre, Erki Russow and Ülle Sillasoo


    Knieff ’s Hook-moss (D. aduncus) was one of the species found from a study of nearly
hundred Dutch historical ship wrecks, used for caulking in more than five ships; in about
half of the studied wrecks Sphagnum mosses of Cuspidata group were used (Cappers et al.
2000). The research concluded that until the 13th century mosses for caulking were main-
ly collected from the forest, whereas from the 14th century onwards they were gathered
from wetlands and bogs. One of the reasons might have been environmental change. The
famous 15th century Copper Wreck found from Polish waters was also caulked with aquatic
Hook-mosses (D. sendtneri, W. exannulata and Calliergonella cuspidate). Ship caulking with
Hook-mosses was widely practiced in medieval Poland (Badura 2014). In the historical ships
of North Belgium Hook-mosses have been used to fill cracks, not as the primary caulking
material (Deforce et al. 2014).
    Mosses have been used in Europe to caulk ship planks since the Bronze Age, and in the
Medieval Period moss was the main caulking material used in both North-East Europe and
Central Europe. Mosses were widely used also in Slavic shipbuilding (see Deforce et al. 2014;
Crumlin-Pedersen 2000). Since the Early Middle Ages the use of animal hair (processed with
tar or wax) spread in Britannia and Scandinavia due to the specificities of construction tech-
niques. In some cases the mosses and hair were mixed, and it is possible that ships from more
southern regions were also caulked with animal hair in the Medieval Period, but the origin of
those ships is not clear (Deforce et al. 2014).
                                                               The ship was made of oak wood. To pre-
                                                           serve the wreck, wood samples (12) from this
                                                           wreck were taken mainly with increment bor-
                                                           er (e.g. Pressler borer in forestry). Besides, four
                                                           cross sections were sawn from the wreck tim-
                                                           bers (Fig. 9). All the samples are of oak wood,
                                                           except one pine sample. Sapwood was not
                                                           established in these samples. The ring widths
Fig. 9. The cross section from the sample of wreck Peeter.
                                                           in the wood samples were measured and nine
Jn 9. Peetri vraki proovi ristlõige.                       ring-width series of planks and floor-timbers
Photo / Foto: Alar Läänelaid                               were averaged into a 263 years long chronol-
                                                           ogy 2eqpee05. This mean tree-ring width se-
ries was synchronized with available oak chronologies from Europe. The mean series of wreck
Peeter appeared to be very similar with East Pomeranian oak chronology (Wazny 2015) at a
position where the last tree ring of the wreck series corresponds to AD 1296 (overlap 263 years,
t = 8.79, Gleichläufigkeit 66.4 at 99.9 significance level). As there was no sapwood in the wood
samples and the outer surface had got lost, the dendrochronological date AD 1296 means termi-
nus post quem – the oak trees were felled after that year (Fig. 10). Similarity of the wreck series
with the East Pomeranian oak chronology gives a basis to assume that the oaks used to build
this ship had grown somewhere in east Poland or even in the region eastward of it.

Selected artefacts found from the wreck
Here, only two find categories will be handled with the focus on dating of the shipwreck and
origin of the items, leaving a closer spatial and statistical analysis of the artefacts aside.
   The previous section of the present paper showed that the possible building time of the
ship was somewhere after AD 1296, however the point in time when the ship wrecked near the
hanseatic town of Tallinn (situated ca. 2 kms to the west) is much more difficult to determine.
Medieval ship finds from Kadriorg, Tallinn                                                                         145




Fig. 10. Span of dated dendrochronological samples from wreck Peeter. Horizontal axis – calendar years, vertical
   axis – samples with their codes, ending with sample number. Numbers at the ends of the bars indicate the initial
   and last calendar year of the samples. Sample 15 (the lowest bar) originates from a later period.
Jn 10. Peetri vraki dateeritud tammeproovide aastarõngaridade ajaline ulatus. Proovidel nende koodid, vasakul iga
   proovi varaseima ja paremal hiliseima aastarõnga aasta. Rõhtteljel kalendriaastad, püstteljel proovid.
Figure / Joonis: Alar Läänelaid


For the possible terminus for the shipwreck,
the most useful approach is to take a closer
look at the pottery finds.
    Altogether around 30 pottery finds (i.e.
number of individual vessels, not sherds) were
found from the wreck, all most likely used
on the ship and not being part of the cargo.
Except for 2–3 greyware pots and one glazed
redware jug (Fig. 11), all other items are near
stoneware and stoneware jugs (Fig. 12), most-
ly from Siegburg but also two larger jugs from
Langerwehe, both major potting industries of
medieval Rhineland. Judging by the typolog-
ical and technological features of the items               0         5 cm
it seems that the focal point of the collection
should be within the 1320s or 1330s, but since
                                                           Fig. 11. Glazed redware jug from the wreck Peeter.
one of the finds belongs to the group of fully             Jn 11. Punane glasuurkeraamiline kann Peetri vrakilt.
developed Siegburg stoneware with traces                   Photo / Foto: Andrus Anderson
146                       Maili Roio, Lembi Lõugas, Alar Läänelaid, Liina Maldre, Erki Russow and Ülle Sillasoo



 0    5 cm                                              of orange ash glaze, a slightly later dating is
                                                        also plausible. Thus, at the current stage of
                                                        the research it seems that the possible time of
                                                        wreckage should be around the second quar-
                                                        ter of the 14th century.
                                                            Another group of finds which deserve
                                                        highlighting here are artefacts made of stone,
                                                        all found from the kitchen area of the ship.
Fig. 12. Siegburg near stoneware and stoneware found on
                                                        These include a larger mortar, a quern and
   wreck Peeter.                                        a few fragments of a baking slate, all having
Jn 12. Peetri vrakilt leitud Siegburgi varakivi- ja     a very different geographical background.
   kivikeraamika.                                       The mortar with anthropomorphic decora-
Photo / Foto: Andrus Anderson
                                                        tion (Fig. 13) can be attributed to the 13th –
                                                        14th-century stone industries of Normandy,
                                                        perhaps even to the vicinity of Caen. Similar
                                                        mortars are rather frequent finds around the
                                                        North Sea, both from coastal settlements
                                                        and ships (see Bencard 1971; Dunning 1977),
                                                        but tend to be less common in the Baltic Sea
                                                        region, which might be reasoned with the
                                                        modest attention to the stone artefacts from
                                                        medieval terrestrial and maritime sites.
                                          0      5 cm
                                                            The same considerations seem to apply to
                                                        other collected stone items. The quern was
Fig. 13. A mortar, possibly a product of medieval stone visually identified and later also confirmed
   industry in Normandy.
Jn 13. Arvatavasti Normandia kivitööstuses valminud
                                                        by petrological analysis (by Toivo Kallaste
   uhmer.                                               and Siim Pajusaar from Tallinn University
Photo / Foto: Andrus Anderson                           of Technology) as an artefact made of vol-
                                                        canic rock phonotephrite, possibly coming
from the Eifel stone industries of Rhineland. These products were widely exported during
the Roman time (Gluhak & Hofmeister 2008), the distribution pattern of late medieval mill
stones and querns has not been mapped so far (for early and high Middle Ages see for ex-
ample Carelli & Kresten 1997). However, it is known that building stone from this region was
frequently shipped to southern Scandinavia up to the early 13th century and were mostly
used in Danish churches of Ribe and Schleswig bishoprics (Pohl 2012, 153–173). But what is
more important in our context, the local documents indicate that Eifel region querns were
used on ships during the 18th century (unregistered material from 1757 at Niedermending
archive, pers. comm. Meinrad Pohl), thus possibly showing the continuation of stone export
to the North and Baltic Sea areas until the Early Modern Age.
    Less well preserved (only in fragments) but equally intriguing is also the last stone artefact
(Fig. 14). This appears to be a bakestone, a common medieval find on archaeological sites of
Norwegian cultural sphere, but such stones were to a certain degree also used in Danish and
Swedish centres which had close trading contacts with Norway, with possible mediator being
the town of Bergen (Baug 2015, 36–39). Outside Scandinavia, the only archaeological evidence
in the Baltic Sea region known to us comes from the hanseatic town of Stralsund (Ansorge 2009,
47 and fig. 18, 11–12), showing once again the interconnectedness of medieval northern Europe.
Medieval ship finds from Kadriorg, Tallinn                                                                                                   147




Fig. 14. Norwegian bakestone (in the bottom left corner), found from the kitchen area of wreck Peeter.
Jn 14. Peetri vraki kööginurgast leitud Norra päritolu küpsetuskivi (pildil all vasakus nurgas).
Photo / Foto: Maili Roio


Mammal and bird bones from and around wreck Peeter
From and around the wreck 154 mammal bones and fragments were gathered, of which 144
were taxonomically and anatomically analysed (Table 1).¹ In addition to mammal bones, only
four fragments of bird bones were found. The osseous material was well preserved and frag-
mentation was minimal. Some difference was noticed in the preservation quality of bones
which probably depended on the time when the bones were buried under the sediments and
also other environmental factors. Some fragments have rounded edges which were caused
most probably by the wave activity, i.e. waves together with sand particles can roll larger
pieces of stones and also bones and thus polish their protruding parts easily. This means that
those rounded bones were clucked with sediments for a while before being totally covered by
protective sediments.
   Most of the identified osseous finds of mammals came from domestic animals: cattle (Bos
taurus) predominated, followed by pig (Sus domesticus), while sheep and/or goat (Ovis aries /
Capra hircus) were represented by a few bones only. However, no bones definitely associated
with goat have been found from the wreck’s material. Dominance of cattle and pig was noticed
also in other studied shipwrecks of the 15th – 18th century (Migaud 2011, 287–288, table 1).
As most of the bones originated from the body regions rich in meat, the provision was taken
on board probably for cooking purposes.
¹ Bones were determined by a comparative method where reference skeletons of the Archaeological Research Collection, Tallinn University, were
used. Bones of the sheep and goat were distinguished according to the bone atlas of Boessneck et al. (1964), for the exclusion or identification
of bison bones Olsen’s (1960) and Stampfli’s (1963) identification criteria were used. Age of death/slaughter was estimated according to the teeth
growth and replacement of deciduous dentition (Schmid 1972) and epiphyseal fusion (Silver 1969).
148                      Maili Roio, Lembi Lõugas, Alar Läänelaid, Liina Maldre, Erki Russow and Ülle Sillasoo


    Bones of domestic cattle originated from a minimum of four individuals: one was of 2.5
years of age, one somewhat less than 4 years and two individuals were over 4–5 years old.
Fragments of vertebrae and costae formed more than a half of the identified cattle bones, the
rest originated from other body parts. According to the fragmentation of bones, a pattern of
butchering can be reconstructed: vertebral column has been chopped longitudinally in half
and then crosswise into shorter parts; ribs are chopped off at a distance of about 5–10 cm
from the vertebral column and then into 11.5–16.5 cm rib pieces. There were no ventral parts
of ribs among the bone finds as well as no sternum pieces. Pelvis was chopped from the part
of ilium and long limb bones have chopping marks in both the proximal and distal ends.
Dominance of the fragments of vertebrae and costae has been noticed also among osteolog-
ical finds of the 15th century shipwreck Aber Wrac’h in France. There the vertebral column
was chopped in half along the median plane, but transverse cuts were not noticed (L’Hour &
Migaud 1990, 8–9). As there were also bone fragments of cattle’s skull and lower limb bones
in wreck Peeter, we cannot exclude live animals as cargo on board, who were only killed at
the time when food was required by sailors.
    In the bone assemblage of the wreck, two extra large bones of bovids (more precisely
Bovinae) have been identified – a distal end of humerus and a tibia. They seem to be too large
for medieval domestic cattle, especially the large tibia was exceptional. Morphologically it
does not fit with the tibia of European bison either. Considering the spatiotemporal origin of
wreck Peeter, we can take into account also an aurochs (Bos primigenius). Aurochs has disap-
peared from Estonia much earlier than the Medieval Period, but there are some 14th-century
finds in Lithuania (Paaver 1965, 320). According to historical documents, the species survived
in Europe until the last recorded aurochs died in the Jaktorów Forest, eastern Poland in 1627
(see e.g. Paaver 1965, 321 and references therein). Bartosiewicz et al. (2010) when studying the
archaeozoological evidence in reconstructing mundane diets in Hungary (the study concerns
zoological identification of wild mammals in a cookbook published in Hungarian at the end
of the 17th century in Transylvania), discuss about a possibility that some ‘wild ox’ could
be aurochs, even though this species had disappeared from Hungary in about 10th – 11th
century. Meat of the wild oxen was very valued at the Medieval Period. Meat of game animals
was valued also in other provisions of ships: there are finds of rabbit, red deer, roe deer, wild
boar and bison found from these ships (e.g. Migaud 2011, table 2; L’Hour & Migaud 1990, 7;
Heinrich 2002, 262; Bruseth & Turner 2005, 125–126). Thus, the aurochs as cargo in wreck
Peeter is not excluded.
    There were only eight bones of sheep or goat in wreck Peeter: two vertebrae, one fragment
of costa, fragment of metacarpal bone, pelvis, tibia, tarsal and metatarsal bone. These bones
originated from at least two individuals: one was less than 10 months and the other over 3.5
years of age. While bones of cattle have mainly butchery marks visible, some of the bones
of sheep/goat (a fragment of costa and metatarsal) had cutting marks caused most probably
during the meat removal process.
    Pig was somewhat more numerous in the bone assemblage and was represented there
at least by two individuals: one was less than a year old and the other ca. 3.5 years old.
Anatomical representation of pigs refers that no heads and legs were used much for food:
there was only one skull fragment, a tarsal bone from lower limbs and metapodial bones
were absent altogether in the material. Chopping marks were observed at the mentioned
skull fragment, also at two lumbar vertebrae and one femur.
Medieval ship finds from Kadriorg, Tallinn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             149


Table 1. Taxonomic and anatomical distribution of mammal bones according to the number of identified specimen and
  minimum number of individuals (NISP/MNI and relative values are represented).
Tabel 1. Imetajaluude taksonoomiline ja anatoomiline koostis (näidatud on määratud luufragmentide arv / mini-
  maalne isendite arv ning suhteline osakaal).
Compiled by / Koostanud: Liina Maldre




                   cornus / processus cornualis /



                                                                      mandibula / alalõualuu                                                                                                                                                                                            os metacarpale / kämblaluu                                                                                    os metatarsale / pöialuu
                                                                                                                                                                          humerus / õlavarreluu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          radius + ulna /


                   sarv ja sarvjätke                cranium / kolju                            dens / hammas   vertebra / selgroolüli                  scapula / abaluu                           radius / kodarluu    ulna / küünarluu                          os carpi / randmeluu                                    pelvis / vaagen                     tibia / sääreluu   os tarsi / kannaluu                              phalanx / varbalüli
                                                                                                                                        costa / roie                                                                                      kodarluu + küünarluu                                                                             femur / reieluu                                                                                             Total / Kokku
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
Bos taurus            2/2                              2/1 1/1 2/2 27/3 37/3 4/1 7/3 3/1 2/2 2/2                                                                                                                                                                     1/1 2/2 3/2 8/3 5/2                                                                                                                                             2/1 110/ 76.4
Cattle / Veis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
Bovinae                                                                                                                                                                       1/1                                                                                                                                                                               1/1                                                                                      2/1 1.4
Pärisveislased
Ovis aries                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/1                                                                1/1 1/1 1/1                                                                              4             2.8
Sheep / Lammas
Ovis aries/                                                                                                        2/1                    1/1                                                                                                                                                                               1/1                                                                                                                          4             2.8
Capra hircus
Sheep / goat /
Kits / lammas
Sus domesticus                                         1/1                                                         2/1                    5/2                                 1/1                                         2/1                                                                                               3/2 4/2 1/1 1/1                                                                                                              20/2 13.9
Pig / Siga
Equus caballus                                         1/1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1/1 0.7
Horse / Hobune
Cervus elaphus        1/1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1/1 0.7
Red deer / Hirv
Phocidae                                                                                                           1/1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/1 0.7
Seals / Hülged
Odontoceti                                                                                       1/1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/1 0.7
Toothed whales /
Hammasvaalalised
Total / Kokku         3                                4                   1                     3                  32                    43              4                   9                      3                    4                 2                        1                       3                              7                 12 8                                  2                      1                         2                    144 100
%                     2.1                              2.8 0.7 2.1 22.2 29.9 2.8 6.3 2.1 2.8 1.4                                                                                                                                                                     0.7 2.1 4.9 8.3 5.6 1.4 0.7 1.4 100


   Horse was represented by one bone find –
an occipital, which originated from a young
individual. Whether this bone was connect-
ed with the shipwreck at all, is not very clear.
Horse bones in shipwrecks are not common
(Migaud 2011, table 2, 289); only one phal-
ange was known before.
   Bones of the red deer were not present in
the shipwreck, only a fragment of antler (i.e.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0                            3 cm
an antler section cut off together with one
tine), which had working and probably also
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fig. 15. A fragment of red deer antler.
exploitation marks visible. This item looks                                                                                                                                                                           Jn 15. Hirvesarve katke.
like a handle of something (Fig. 15).                                                                                                                                                                                 Photo / Foto: Reet Maldre
150                                 Maili Roio, Lembi Lõugas, Alar Läänelaid, Liina Maldre, Erki Russow and Ülle Sillasoo


                                                         A most outstanding find in Estonian con-
                                                     text is probably a tooth of the toothed ceta-
                                                     cean (Odontoceti). This identification has to
                                                     be checked since it needs more precise con-
                                  0      1 cm
                                                     formity with some certain species (Fig. 16).
                                                     According to the tooth size and shape it may
                                                     most probably come from orca (Orcinus orca),
                                                     known also as killer whale (L. Lõugas’ opin-
                                                     ion). However, larger sperm whale (Physeter
                                  0         5 mm
                                                     macrocephalus), which has also larger and
                                                     more oval teeth should not be excluded since
                                                     its teeth can be somewhat different depend-
                                                     ing on their position in the jaw and age of the
Fig. 16. Tooth of the toothed cetacean (Odontoceti).
Jn 16. Hammasvaalalise (Odontoceti) hambakatke.      animal. We do not have enough comparative
Photo / Foto: Reet Maldre                            material to distinguish that.
                                                         Avian fauna² was represented by a hu-
merus of ca. two-month-old domestic hen (Gallus gallus); one fragment of radius and one
tibiotarsus could originate also from the hen (age of individuals respectively ca. two months,
and six weeks). In addition, there was a pelvic fragment of a middle-sized Anseriformes in
the material.

Evidence of fish and fish trade
The current study also focused on the fish remains found in situ from the bottom of the wreck
and to some extent also outside of the board. Fish remains had some clear distinguishable
accumulation places within the ship: kitchen waste in the ship’s stern, two separately locat-
ed bunches of fish whose tails were originally tied together, a barrel in the ship’s fore and a
box made of birch bark.
   Altogether 2675 fish bones and approximately 5000 scales were taxonomically and ana-
tomically analysed (Table 2). Only 241 fish bone fragments were left as unidentified. Such a
low number of unidentified fish bones is not very usual in archaeological contexts since fish
skeleton can provide a lot of fragments of costae, rays, spines and radials, which in most
cases remain unidentified. In our case, when many individuals were found in situ, such
bones were associated with the rest of the fish skeleton and could be identified accordingly.³
   The largest fish-bone assemblage came from the stern of the ship and could be associated
with kitchen waste. Part of it was most likely washed out from the board since similar accu-
mulation of fish bones was found just from the other side (outside) of the board. The kitchen
waste included bones of minimum 47 individuals and ca. 3700 scales of pike (Esox lucius). A
minimum number of individuals was counted based on the right dental bone (Dentale dexter).
Among 1445 bones of pike there were only 135 vertebrae, which all came from the very end of
the cranial or caudal part of the vertebral column. The rest of the bones were from fish heads.
Thus, this accumulation seems as typical waste which is a result of fish processing (decapita-
tion) and from where trunks of fish have been taken away (sold?) somewhere else. Probably
such kitchen waste formed during quite a short time just before the shipwreck, since keeping

² Bird bones were identified by Teresa Tomek (Polish Academy of Sciences, Institute of Systematics and Evolution of Animals).
³ Fish bones were determined by a comparative method where reference skeletons of the Archaeological Research Collection, Tallinn University,
were used.
Medieval ship finds from Kadriorg, Tallinn                                                                                                                       151


smelling fish remains in the boat for a longer
time seems doubtful. Beside the remains of
pike, 89 bones of cod (Gadus morhua), main-
ly vertebrae, and only one dentale of turbot
(Scophthalmus maximus) were found from
this waste accumulation (Table 2).
   Two separately located bunches of fish
whose tails were probably originally tied
together, included only cod and were found
also from the ship’s stern, but more towards
the middle part of the ship from the kitchen
waste. One was found in starboard (Fig. 17)
                                                  Fig. 17. Bones of cods tied into a bundle.
and the other in port side. There were verte- Jn 17. Kimpu seotud turskade luud.
brae of cods, 16 individuals in one bunch and Photo / Foto: Jaana Ratas
10 in another. Individual fish were counted
mainly based on fifth vertebra as the most frequently occurring bone element in these bone
accumulations, but also the size and location of bones were counted. From the pectoral gir-
dle (Table 2), the most commonly represented bone was cleithrale. In most cases they were
cut in half when decapitated, thus posterior parts of the cleithral bones (sometimes scapula
was also connected) stayed with the trunk. In addition to the individuals of two bunches
there were also four other individuals counted in the ship’s stern (mentioned above) and
three individuals in the ship’s fore, but they were represented by a few bones only, including
some bones from the skull.

Table 2. Taxonomic and anatomical representation of fish bones.
Tabel 2. Kalaluude liigiline ja anatoomiline koostis.
Compiled by / Koostanud: Lembi Lõugas




                                                                                          Baltic herring / Räim                         Turbot / Kammeljas

                                                                         Cod / Tursk                              Perch / Ahven
                                                                                          (Clupea harengus

                                                                                                                                        (Scophthalmus maximus)
                                                         Pike / Haug

                                                         (Esox lucius)   (Gadus morhua)   membras)                (Perca fluviatilis)
 Anatomical section / Kehaosa
 Head (including mandible) / Pea (sh lõualuud)            824             96               48                      2                     1
 Opercularia / Lõpusekaaneluud                            81              1                28
 Pectoral girdle / Esivööde                               83              60
 Vertebral column / Selgroog                              135             510              27
 Other bones (costae, spines, rays, etc.) /               322             443              14
 Muud luud (roided, lülijätked, uimekiired jne)
 Total (NISP/MNI) / Kokku:                                1445/50         1110/33          117/5                   2/2                   1/1


  The analyses of sediments from a wood barrel and a box made of birch bark gave quite a
small amount of herring bones (NISP=87, MNI=2 from barrel and NISP=26, MNI=2 from box)
and a lot of scales, especially from the barrel. There were also two bones (articulare and
dentale) of perch (Perca fluviatilis) in this barrel, which came from different individuals, both
152                          Maili Roio, Lembi Lõugas, Alar Läänelaid, Liina Maldre, Erki Russow and Ülle Sillasoo


less than 15 cm in total length. The body size of herrings refers rather to the Baltic herring,
remaining at ca. 18–25 cm in total length. The size estimation here was done in comparison
with the skeletons in reference collection of the Archaeological Research Collection, Tallinn
University.

Morphometrics of discovered fish
The aim of morphometric analyses was to get more precise information on the sizes of pikes
and especially cods found from the shipwreck. For pikes a right dental bone (NISP=47) and
for cod a fifth vertebra (NISP=21) were measured (measurements are according to Morales &
Rosenlund 1979). These bones were chosen since they serve as a basis of calculating a mini-
mum number of individuals and thus the duplication of individuals in a data set was exclud-
ed. The size estimation was done in comparison with the skeletons of our reference collection.
Pikes of this reference collection were captured from the coastal waters in west Estonia, but
cods from the northern fjords in Norway (cods from the Baltic Sea were clearly too small for
the reference). Measurements were entered into the charts which give a general impression of
the body sizes (TL). There are not enough reference skeletons of pike available in our collec-
tion, but still we can say that most of pikes from the shipwreck remained at a length of 40 to
60 cm (Fig. 18: A). No much larger individuals occurred. Reference cods were more numerous
(NISP=13), but appeared to be smaller than those in the shipwreck (Fig. 18: B). A probable
explanation is that coastal cods in northern Norway are usually smaller (i.e. growth rate is
slower) than those of the open ocean (see e.g. Berg & Albert 2003) and that the reference skel-
etons are coming from the fish captured randomly by amateur fishermen in northern fjords.
Cods from the shipwreck were quite large, at the total length of ca. 100 cm, but seemingly even
larger specimen occurred. This means that those cods were most probably captured in the




Fig. 18. Simplified charts for the estimation of the body length (TL) of pike, Esox lucius (A) and cod, Gadus morhua
   (B) found from wreck Peeter. The line indicates a mean linear value of growth. Red rhombs mark fi sh with the
   known body length (lengths written near the rhombs) from reference collection; blue rhombs mark fi sh bones
   from the shipwreck.
Jn 18. Lihtsustatud graafikud haugi, Esox lucius (A) ja tursa, Gadus morhua (B) kerepikkuste (TL) hindamiseks.
   Graafikut läbiv joon näitab lineaarset kasvu. Punased rombid markeerivad võrdluskollektsioonist pärit kalu,
   mille kerepikkused on teada (pikkused on näidatud rombi juures), sinised rombid markeerivad kalu, mis leiti
   Peetri vrakist.
Figure / Joonis: Lembi Lõugas
Medieval ship finds from Kadriorg, Tallinn                                                          153


open ocean, but the body size of cods does not indicate from which part of the Atlantic Ocean.
Previous studies (Orton et al. 2011) allow estimating the origin of imported cod in medieval
Tallinn and other towns in Estonia from the north-eastern Atlantic or North Sea.

Long vs short-ranged fish trade
Archaeological evidence, in the form of fish remains, from medieval towns explains mostly
local fisheries within Estonia and it is not possible to detect the distances involved in the
trade of fish. The latter is based on our knowledge of fish distribution in local and/or distant
water bodies (Lõugas 2001; 2016). This means that only taxonomical analyses are not very
helpful in determining the trade distances. Tartu is an exception here since there bones of
large cod were found and definitely marine fish are not natural inhabitants in freshwaters,
but reflect the imports from the sea coast.
   Morphometrics sometimes helps to determine the origin of fish, especially when we distin-
guish for example the (sub)species of the Baltic and the Atlantic like e.g. cods (Gadus morhua)
and herrings (Clupea harengus). In ocean environment the growth rate in all age-classes is
faster than in more brackish inland sea, thus the specimen at the same age range in the
Atlantic ocean are larger than those in the Baltic sea, especially in the eastern part of the
Baltic sea (see e.g. Cardinale & Arrhenius 2000). Analysis of stable isotopes (e.g. ¹³C, ¹⁵N) is a
quite effective tool in detecting the origin of fish (see e.g. Barrett et al. 2008; Orton et al. 2011).
Thus many large cod bones found from medieval town sediments and the discovered wreck
originate from the Atlantic side, most probably the North Sea. Fish bones in combination
with other archaeological finds shed light to the trade more efficiently, for example, oyster
shells prove long-ranged trade more clearly as they do not live in the Baltic sea. Oyster shells
were found e.g. in Tallinn (Tartu Street 1, Vabaduse Square) and Pärnu (Lõugas 2001; 2016),
but not from the shipwrecks in Kadriorg. Here, it seems that some fish (stockfish) were import-
ed from much farther distances than the origin of the ship indicates, while herrings seem to
represent the local Baltic stock.

SOME THOUGHTS ON THE SITE FORMATION
A time capsule is a commonly used comparison to a shipwreck (see Adams 2013), since dif-
ferently from the objects studied on land, shipwrecks usually constitute immovable monu-
ments that have formed during a certain, and usually a very short time period. Therefore,
the items found on board of a ship and in its immediate proximity form a time capsule – the
everyday items have been in use at the same time, which gives us an opportunity to have a
glimpse into a ‘frozen’ workday. It is seldom possible to encounter a similar situation on land.
Usually the archaeological finds have stratified in the ground in the course of a long time and
often after some catastrophe (fire, landslide, collapse, etc.) occurred, the valuables and prac-
tical items were picked out from the destruction layers. It is also important to emphasise that
due to better preservation conditions, the finds are much more complete, than for example
the pottery sherds and other fragmentary material found in the course of urban excavations.
When talking about the location of the Kadriorg wrecks, their closeness to the city has to be
taken into account, which is essential in the site’s formation process.
   The formation of each wreck-site is unique, since the complex and interacting variables
that constitute the environmental setting, the nature of the ship, and the circumstances
of its loss will combine to create a set of attributes unique to each site (Martin 2011, 47).
154                     Maili Roio, Lembi Lõugas, Alar Läänelaid, Liina Maldre, Erki Russow and Ülle Sillasoo


When interpreting excavation material of these medieval shipwrecks, one must keep in
mind that the ships were lost near the shore, where there were brisk life activities, and still
100 years ago the place was used actively as a beach and at the same time also waste was
dumped to the site. The marine processes that have taken place throughout several hun-
dred years in relatively shallow waters are also a reason for distinguishing the site from a
traditional notion of a time capsule. Therefore, the whole find material must be critically
analysed and when connecting each find with the wreck, one must consider the possibility
that it has reached the site by chance. For example, when comparing the find context of
fish bones and animal bones in wreck Peeter, the fish bones were found in expected places
like the galley or inside the barrels, and they have not been found outside the wreck or
from the filling layer. There is a complete opposite situation with most of the animal bones
that were found, for example a horse bone was collected from outside the wreck next to the
starboard.

CONCLUSION
The archaeological excavations of two wrecks organised by the Estonian National Heritage
Board took place in a relatively limited time frame and with even more limited preparation
time, in the course of salvage excavations. It was decided that both wrecks were to be pre-
served: wreck Viljo was placed under water in Tallinn Bay and wreck Peeter is waiting to be
conserved and exhibited at the Estonian Maritime Museum.
   The construction time of wreck Viljo was soon after AD 1487, according to the dendrochron-
ological studies. As the tree-ring series of the wreck appeared most similar with Estonian pine
chronology, we may assume that the pines for that ship were grown in the region of Estonia.
The artefactual material from that wreck was too scarce to establish a possible time of wreck-
age. Wreck Peeter preserved with more find material was built after AD 1296. Similarity of the
tree-ring series with the East Pomeranian oak chronology gives a basis to assume that the
oaks used to build this ship were grown anywhere in east Poland or even in the region east-
ward of it. It is difficult to establish when the ship went aground but the preliminary study of
pottery suggests that it happened around the second quarter of 14th century. Both examined
ceramics as well stone artefacts show a very broad geographical background of the finds but
more thorough studies of wrecks and their find material still waits ahead. The animal and
fish bones, and plant residues have been determined, but a more in-depth analysis will be
conducted in the near future.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank everybody who have contributed to the discussion on the
site formation and different aspects on arte- and ecofacts. We wish to thank the Estonian
Ministry of Culture, OÜ Metro Capital, AS Nordecon and OÜ Eriehitustööd for their assistance
in the excavation process. Erki Russow is grateful to Jörg Ansorge (Greifswald), Irene Baug
(Bergen) and Meinrad Pohl (Bergen) who shared their thoughts on stone artefacts. This article
was written with the support of a research project of the Estonian Ministry of Education and
Research (IUT18-8) and Estonian Science Foundation grant no. 9405. Animal bone analyses
were carried out by the use of skeletal reference collection stored in the Tallinn University
Archaeological Research Collection.
Medieval ship finds from Kadriorg, Tallinn                                                                     155


REFERENCES
Adams, J. 2013. A Maritime Archaeology of Ships.           Carelli, P. & Kresten, P. 1997. Give us this day our
   Innovation and Social Change in Medieval and Early         daily bread. A study of late Viking Age and me-
   Modern Europe. Oxford; Oakville.                           dieval quernstones in South Scandinavia.– Acta
Ansorge, J. 2009. Die Ausgrabungen für das                    Archaeologica, 68, 109–137.
   Stralsunder OZEANUM – Einblicke in den Hafen            Cappers, R. T. J., Mook-Kamps, E., Bottema, S.,
   einer Hansestadt. – Ein Museum setzt Segel – das           van Zanten, B. O. & Vlierman, K. 2000. The anal-
   OZEANUM in Stralsund. Meer und Museum, 22.                 ysis of caulking material in the study of shipbuild-
   Stralsund, 37–62.                                          ing technology. – Palaeohistoria, 39/40, 577–590.
Badura, M. 2014. The plant remains. – The Copper           Crumlin-Pedersen, O. 2000. To be or not to be a cog:
   Ship. A Medieval Shipwreck and its Cargo. Ed. by           the Bremen Cog in perspective. – International
   W. Ossowski. Gdańsk, 419–428.                              Journal of Nautical Archaeology, 29: 2, 230–246.
Barrett, J., Johnstone, C., Harland, J.,                   Daly, A. 2007. Timber, Trade and Tree-rings. A
   Van Neer, W., Ervynck, A., Makowiecki, D.,                 Dendrochronological Analysis of Structural Oak
   Heinrich, D., Hufthammer, A. K., Bødker-                   Timber in Northern Europe, c. AD 1000 to c. 1650.
   Enghoff, I., Amundsen, C., Christiansen, J. S.,            PhD Dissertation, University of Southern Denmark.
   Jones, A. K. G., Locker, A., Hamilton-Dyer, S.,         Deforce, K., Allemeersch, L., Stieperaere, H. &
   Jonsson, L., Lõugas, L., Roberts, C. &                     Haneca, K. 2014. Tracking ancient ship routes
   Richards, M. 2008. Detecting the medieval cod              through the analysis of caulking material from
   trade: a new method and first results. – Journal of        shipwrecks? The case study of two 14th century
   Archaeological Science, 35, 850–860.                       cogs from Doel (northern Belgium). – Journal of
Bartosiewicz, L., Gyetvai, A. & Küchelmann, H. C.             Archaeological Science, 43, 299–314.
   2010. The Beast in the feast. – Bestial Mirrors.        Dunning, G. C. 1977. Mortars. – Excavations in King’s
   Using Animals to Construct Human Identities in             Lynn 1963–1970. Ed. by H. Clarke & A. Carter. The
   Medieval Europe. Animals as Material Culture in the        Society for Medieval Archaeology. Monograph
   Middle Ages, 3. Ed. by A. Pluskowski, G. K. Kunst, M.      Series, 7. London, 320–347.
   Kucera, M. Bietak & I. Hein. VIA VIAS, 3/2010. Wien,    Ellmers, D. 1994. The cog as cargo carrier. – Cogs,
   85–99.                                                     Caravels and Galleons. The Sailing Ship 1000–1650.
Baug, I. 2015. Stones for bread. Regional differences         Ed. by R. W. Unger, London, 29–46.
   and changes in Scandinavian food traditions             Gluhak, T. & Hofmeister, W. 2008. Provenance
   related to the use of quernstones, bakestones and          analysis of Roman millstones: mapping of trade
   soapstone vessels c. AD 800–1500. – Nordic Middle          areas in Roman Europe. – Geoarchaeology
   Ages – Artefacts, Landscapes and Society. Essays           and Archaeomineralogy. Proceedings of the
   in Honour of Ingvild Øye on her 70th Birthday. Ed.         International Conference, 29–30 October 2008. Ed.
   by I. Baug, J. Larsen & S. S. Mygland. University of       by R. I. Kostov, B. Gaydarska & M. Gurova. Sofia,
   Bergen Archaeological Series, 8. Bergen, 33–47.            111–115.
Bencard, M. 1971. Middelalderlige stenmortere i            Heinrich, D. 2002. A comparison of animal bones from
   Danmark.– KUML. Årbog for Jysk Arkæologisk                 wrecks of two ships (17th and 18th century) stranded
   Selskab 1971, 35–60.                                       on the North Sea coast of Schleswig-Holstein. –
Berg, E. & Albert, T. 2003. Cod in fjords and coastal         Bonner zoologische Beiträge, 50: 3, 259–267.
   waters of north Norway: distribution and variation      Läänelaid, A. 2012. Mida kasulikku annab aastarõn-
   in length and maturity at age. – ICES Journal of           gaste uurimine? – Eesti Mets, 1, 20–25.
   Marine Science, 60, 787–797.                            Läänelaid, A. & Eckstein, D. 2003. Development of a
Boessneck, J., Müller, H. H. & Teichert, M. 1964.             tree-ring chronology of Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris
   Osteologische Unterscheidungsmerkmale zwischen             L.) for Estonia as a dating tool and climate proxy. –
   Schaf (Ovis aries Linné) und Ziege (Capra hircus           Baltic Forestry, 9: 2, 76−82.
   Linné). – Kühn-Archiv, 78, 1–129.                       L’Hour, M. & Migaud, P. 1990. Reflet d’un aspect de
Bruseth, J. E. & Turner, T. S. 2005. From A Watery            la vie du bord: étude préliminaire des restes osseux
   Grave: The Discovery and Excavation of La Salle’s          de l’épave de l’Aber Wrac’h (Finistère, XVe s.). –
   Shipwreck. College Station TX.                             Anthropozoologica, 12, 3–12.
Cardinale, M. & Arrhenius, F. 2000. Decreasing             Lõugas, L. 2001. Development of fishery during the 1st
   weight-at-age of Atlantic herring (Clupea harengus)        and 2nd millennia AD in the Baltic region. – EJA, 5:
   from the Baltic Sea between 1986 and 1996: a statis-       2, 128–147.
   tical analysis. – ICES Journal of Marine Science, 57,
   882–893.
156                           Maili Roio, Lembi Lõugas, Alar Läänelaid, Liina Maldre, Erki Russow and Ülle Sillasoo


Lõugas, L. 2016. Fishing and fish trade during the          Paaver, K. L. 1965 = Паавер К. Л. 1965.
   Viking Age and Middle Ages in the Eastern and               Формирование териофауны и изменчивость
   Western Baltic Sea Regions. – Cod and Herring: the          млекопитающих Прибалтики в голоцене. Тарту.
   Archaeology and History of Medieval Sea Fishing.         Pohl, M. 2012. Steinreich. Mühlsteine, Tuff und Trass
   Ed. by J. Barrett & D. Orton. Oxford, 111–116.              aus der östlichen Vulkaneifel und ihr Markt. Eine
Martin, C. 2011. Wreck-site formation processes. – The         vergleichende Analyse vorindustrieller Produktions-
   Oxford Handbook of Maritime Archaeology. Ed. by             und Handelsstrukturen. Veröffentlichungen aus dem
   A. Catsambis, B. Ford & D. L. Hamilton. Oxford, 47–67.      Deutschen Bergbau-Museum Bochum, 188. Bochum.
Migaud, P. 2011. A first approach to link between ani-      Schmid, E. 1972. Atlas of Animal Bones: for
   mals and life on board sailing vessels (1500–1800). –       Prehistorians, Archaeologists and Quaternary
   International Journal of Nautical Archaeology, 40:          Geologists = Knochenatlas: für Prähistoriker,
   2, 283–292.                                                 Archäologen und Quartärgeologen. Amsterdam;
Morales, A. & Rosenlund, K. 1979. Fish Bone                    London; New York.
   Measurements. An Attempt to Standardize the              Silver, I. A. 1969. The ageing of domestic animals. –
   Measuring of Fish Bones from Archaeological Sites.          Science in Archaeology. Ed. by D. Brothwell & E. S.
   Copenhagen.                                                 Higgs. London, 283–302.
Olsen, S. J. 1960. Postcranial Skeletal Characters of       Stampfli, H. R. 1963. Wisent, Bison bonasus (Linné)
   Bison and Bos. Papers of the Peabody Museum of              1758, Ur, Bos primigenius (Bojanus) 1827, und
   Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, 35,          Hausrind, Bos taurus (Linné) 1758. – J. Boessneck,
   4. Cambridge, Mass.                                         I. P. Jéquier, H. R. Stampfli. Seeberg Burgäschisee-
Orton, D., Makowiecki, D., de Roo, T.,                         Süd. Die Tierreste. Acta Bernensia, vol. 2, part 3.
   Johnstone, C., Harland, J., Jonsson, L.,                    Bern, 117–196.
   Heinrich, D., Bødker-Enghoff, I., Lõugas, L.,            Wazny, T. 2002. Baltic timber in Western Europe –
   Van Neer, W., Ervynck, A., Hufthammer, A. K.,               an exciting dendrochronological question. –
   Amundsen, C., Jones, A. K. G., Locker, A.,                  Dendrochronologia, 20: 3, 313–320.
   Hamilton-Dyer, S., Mackenzie, B., Richards, M.,          Wazny, T. 2015. Oak chronology of East Pomerania
   O’Connell, T. C. & Barrett, J. 2011. Stable isotope         996–1986 AD. National Climatic Data Center,
   evidence for late medieval (14th–15th C) origins of         NESDIS, NOAA, U.S. Department of Commerce.
   the eastern Baltic cod (Gadus morhua) fishery. – PLoS       https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/paleo/study/5214
   ONE 6 (11), e27568. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0027568        (visited 1.12.2015)
Archaeological Fieldwork in Estonia 2015, 139–158                                                            157


KESKAEGSED LAEVALEIUD TALLINNAST KADRIORUST
Maili Roio, Lembi Lõugas, Alar Läänelaid, Liina Maldre, Erki Russow ja Ülle Sillasoo

22. mai hommikul 2015 võttis Muinsuskaitseametiga ühendust AS Nordecon projektijuht Agu Zilensk ja andis
teada Tallinnas Kadriorus Pikksilma tn 2/1 leitud puidust laeva osadest ja ehitustööde peatamisest: ehitajad
olid sattunud sulundseina terasprofiili paigaldamisel takistusele, mille päritolu asuti kindlaks tegema kopaga.
Kokku tõsteti kopaga vesisest pinnasest välja ligi paarkümmend kaart ja planku, mis toimetati 25. mail Eesti
Meremuuseumi. 25. mai õhtutundidel satuti samal ehitusplatsil aadressil Tuukri 23 veel ühele laevavrakile,
mis paiknes esimesest ligi 50 meetrit idas (jn 1, 2).
    Muinsuskaitseameti seisukoht oli, et ajalooliste vrakkide leiukohal tuleb korraldada arheoloogilised välja-
kaevamised, kaevamiste käigus vrakid toestada ja teisaldada säilitusalale meres, kuna maapinnal puudu-
vad vastavad hoiustamisruumid. Arheoloogilised uuringud vrakkide leiukohal toimusid 11.06.–9.08.2015
Muinsuskaitseameti eestvõttel.
    Enne arheoloogilisi uuringuid kooriti ehitusplatsil maapinda kuni vrakkide tasapinnani ja seejärel uuriti
ala georadariga, et välja selgitada vrakkide ulatus. Kuna esimesed vrakkide detailid paljandusid veidi vähem
kui meeter allpool merepinda, paigaldati väljakaevamiste ala ümber nõelfilterkuivendussüsteem (jn 3). Lisaks
aitas kaevandite kuivana hoidmisele kaasa kogu ehitusala ümbritsev sulundsein. Vrakid puhastati esmalt
seest ja seejärel kaevati kopaga vrakkide ümber kraav, mille sisse paigaldati terasest tugiraam. Seejärel eemal-
dati järk-järgult vraki alt ja ümbert labidatega pinnas ja samaaegselt ehitati puidust tugistruktuur.
    Vrakkide leiukohal laius veel 100 aastat tagasi meri. 1930. aastatel planeeriti Kadrioru mereranda näituse
väljakut ning Põhja Paberi- ja Puupapivabrik hakkas kokkuleppel linnavalitsusega vedama sinna täiteks vab-
riku põlevkivituhka. Praegu moodustabki tuhk, ehituspraht ja olmeprügi kuni nelja meetri paksuse täitekihi,
mille alt paljandusid ajaloolised vrakid.
    Arheoloogilisi väljakaevamisi alustati teisena leitud vrakil, mis sai Nordeconi objektijuhi Viljo Niidi järgi
töönimeks “Viljo”. Vrakk oli randa kinni jooksnud ninaga Kadrioru suunas ning sellest on säilinud suurem osa
pakpoordist ja põhi (jn 4). Terviklikult säilinud osa mõõtmed on umbes 14 × 3,5 m. Alles on ka laeva põhjast
lahti tulnud kiil, mis paiknes väikese nihkega põhjaplankude kõrval tüürpoordis.
    Viljo vraki puhul on tegemist tüüpilise Põhjamaade laevaehitustraditsiooni järgiva laeva jäänustega, kus
on kasutatud klinkerplangutust. Laeva veetiheduse tagamiseks on tihtimiseks kasutatud loomakarvu. Vraki
esemeline leiumaterjal oli äärmiselt kesine. Enamik leidudest pärineb segatud kihist ja on seotud hilisemate
tegevustega. Tõenäoliselt on laevalt juba üsna kohe peale hukkumist ära viidud kõik väärtuslik, mida vähegi
oli võimalik kätte saada. Purjelaeva vrakiga seonduvateks saab lugeda kaarte vahele jäänud puidust plokki
(jn 5), vööri põhjaosas säilinud harilikust kanepist (Cannabis sativa) tehtud köiestikku, ahtriosas põhja alt
leitud metallist graapenit ja tõenäoliselt ka kiilu all asunud puidust tünnikaant.
    Viljo vrakist võtsime 20 puiduproovi peamiselt plankudest ja kaartest; neist 16 ristlõiku (männipuit) ja
4 puurproovi (tammepuit, tääv). Männiproovide aastarõngarida võrreldi olemasolevate männikronoloogiatega
Eestist ja mujalt Euroopast, otsides sarnaseid lõike. Tõenäoliselt raiuti plankude männid peatselt pärast 1487.
aastat (jn 7). Vraki aastarõngaridade suurim sarnasus Eesti männikronoloogiaga lubab oletada, et Viljo laev
oli valmistatud Eestis kasvanud puidust.
    Esimesena leiti ja teisena kaevati välja krundi läänepoolses osas asunud vrakk. Sellele, nn Peetri vrakile
andis töönime kopajuht Peeter Hallikas. Ahtriga vanalinna poole paiknenud vraki maksimaalne pikkus on
18,08, maksimaalne laius 6,64, maksimaalne kõrgus pakpoordis 3,05 ja maksimaalne kõrgus tüürpoordis 2,11
meetrit (jn 8).
    Tegemist on keskaegse kaubalaeva, koge vrakiga. Sirge vöör- ja ahtertääviga laevast on säilinud kogu
pikkuses plankkiil, karveelplangutuses ehitatud põhjaosa, klinkerplangutuses pardad, kiilson, siseplangu-
tust, suured kniid ja põikitalad. Lisaks olid plangusaamad kaetud puuliistudega, mis on plankude külge kinni-
tatud raudklambritega ja planguservad on omavahel kokku liidetud seestpoolt kahekorra keeratud ja uuesti
plangu sisse tagasilöödud raudnaeltega. Laeva triivimiseks kasutatud samblaliikidest olid esindatud peami-
selt kallas-sirbik (Drepanocladus aduncus) ja ujuv vesisirbik (Warnstorfia fluitans).
    Peetri vrakist võtsime 12 puiduproovi puuriga ja 4 ristlõiku (jn 9). Peale ühe männipuidu on kõik proovid
tammepuidust. Peetri vraki tammepuidu aastarõngarida osutus väga sarnaseks Ida-Pommeri tammekronoloo-
giaga positsioonis, kus Peetri vraki viimane aastarõngas on kohakuti kalendriaastaga 1296 (jn 10), laev saadi
ehitada selle aasta järel. Peetri vraki tammepuidu aastarõngaridade sarnasus Ida-Pommeri tammekronoloo-
giaga annab alust oletada, et laevapuiduks tarvitatud tammed on kasvanud kusagil Ida-Poolas või sellest ida
pool.
158                            Maili Roio, Lembi Lõugas, Alar Läänelaid, Liina Maldre, Erki Russow ja Ülle Sillasoo


    Kogelt kogutud leiud on väga mitmekesised, sisaldades kõike alates puitesemetest ja tekstiilist kuni keraa-
mika ja kivini. Laevalt leitud kolmekümne savinõu (nt jn 11, 12) põhjal näib, et laev uppus millalgi 14. sajandi
teisel veerandil, seevastu kolm koge kööginurgast leitud kivieset osutavad laeva materiaalse kultuuri geo-
graafilisele mitmekülgsusele. Nii kuulub leitud antropomorfse kujundusega uhmer (jn 13) ilmselt Normandia
13.–14. sajandi kivitööstuse toodete sekka, kahepoolne käsikivi valmistati Reinimaal Eifeli piirkonna vulkaani-
lisest kivimist ning küpsetuskivi (jn 14) esindab tüüpilist Norra köögitarvet, mis väljapool Skandinaavia kul-
tuurisfääri ei levinudki.
    Peetri vrakist ja selle vahetust lähedusest koguti 154 imetajaluud ja luufragmenti, neist määratavateks osu-
tus 144 eksemplari (tabel 1); lisaks imetajaluudele oli materjalis ka neli linnuluu katket ning kalaluud ja -soo-
mused. Enamik luumaterjalist on pärit koduloomadelt: ülekaalukalt domineerivad veise (Bos taurus) luud,
arvukuselt järgmisel kohal on siga (Sus domesticus), lambad-kitsed (Ovis aries/Capra hircus) on esindatud
üksikute luuleidudega. Valdav osa luumaterjalist on pärit loomade liharohketest kerepiirkondadest, seega on
tegemist jäänustega toidu valmistamiseks varutud lihast.
    Analüüsitud kalaliikidest leidus köögijäätmete seas haugi, räime, turska, ahvenat ja kammeljat (tabel 2).
Kaks leitud tursa selgroogude kogumit (jn 17) pärinevad keskajal ulatusliku kalakauba-artikli – kuivatatud
turskade – seast. Nende turskade pikkused, mis mõõtmistulemuste järgi jäid 1 m kanti, on iseloomulikud
Atlandi ookeani populatsiooni(de)le.
    Kadrioru vrakkide juures tuleb arvestada, et leiukoht asus tiheasustusega ala lähedal, mis on määrav seal-
sete ladestuste tekkeprotsessis. Väljakaevamise materjali tõlgendamisel tuleb silmas pidada, et laevad olid
hukkunud ranniku lähedal, kus toimus vilgas elutegevus ja mis veel 100 aastat tagasi oli aktiivselt kasutusel
supelrannana, aga samas ka prügi ladustamiskohana. Mitmesaja aasta jooksul suhteliselt madalas vees aset
leidnud merelised protsessid on samuti põhjuseks, mis eristavad leiukohta traditsioonilisest ettekujutusest
ajakapslist. Seetõttu tuleb väga kriitiliselt suhtuda kogu leiumaterjali ja iga leiu seostamisel vrakiga arvestada
võimalusega, et see on sattunud leiukohta juhuslikult.
